The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Flowering Plants of South Africa; vol.
2/3, by I.B. Pole Evans

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Flowering Plants of South Africa; vol. 2/3

Author: I.B. Pole Evans

Release Date: January 19, 2021 [eBook #64336]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             available at The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FLOWERING PLANTS OF SOUTH
AFRICA; VOL. 2/3 ***




                        THE FLOWERING PLANTS OF
                             SOUTH AFRICA.

 A MAGAZINE CONTAINING HAND-COLOURED FIGURES WITH DESCRIPTIONS OF THE
             FLOWERING PLANTS INDIGENOUS TO SOUTH AFRICA.

                               EDITED BY

            I. B. POLE EVANS, C.M.G., M.A., D.Sc., F.L.S.,

     Chief, Division of Botany and Plant Pathology, Department of
  Agriculture, Pretoria; and Director of the Botanical Survey of the
                        Union of South Africa.

                               VOL. II.

                            [Illustration]

         The veld which lies so desolate and bare
         Will bloom into cities white and fair,
         And pinnacles will pierce the desert air,
         And sparkle in the sun.
                R. C. MACFIE’S “EX UNITATE VIRES.”


                                LONDON:

                         L. REEVE & CO., LTD.,

                  6, HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN.


                             SOUTH AFRICA:

              THE SPECIALITY PRESS OF SOUTH AFRICA, LTD.

         P.O. BOX 3958, JOHANNESBURG; P.O. BOX 388, CAPETOWN.

                                 1922

                       [_All rights reserved._]




                                  TO
                        SENATOR THE HONOURABLE
                           CHARLES G. SMITH
                                  OF
                            DURBAN, NATAL,

               TO WHOSE GENEROSITY BOTANICAL SCIENCE IN
              SOUTH AFRICA IS MUCH INDEBTED, THIS VOLUME
               OF “THE FLOWERING PLANTS OF SOUTH AFRICA”
                       IS GRATEFULLY DEDICATED.

                     DIVISION OF BOTANY, PRETORIA,
                          _September, 1922_.




[Illustration: _41._

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 41.

ALOE WICKENSII.

_Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

LILIACEAE. Tribe ALOINEAE.

ALOE, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 776.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Aloe Wickensii=, _Pole Evans in Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Afr._ vol. v. p. 29,
Pls. 8, 9.

       *       *       *       *       *


This is one of the most beautiful and showy of the South Africa species
of _Aloe_. Specimens were collected by Messrs. Wickens and Pienaar in
M‘Phathlele’s Location in the Northern Transvaal, in January, 1914. The
species is also found widely distributed in the Oliphants River
Bushveld. It is now established in the Garden of the Division of Botany,
Pretoria, and in the latter part of July and August when in flower is a
source of great admiration to visitors.

In general appearance and habit of growth this _Aloe_ closely resembles
_A. Pienaarii_ from the same locality, figured in vol. i. of this work
(Plate 27), but it is more commonly found on gentle slopes in bush
country, although it may frequently occur in open ground along with _A.
Pienaarii_. When the plants are not in flower, those of _A. Wickensii_
can be distinguished from _A. Pienaarii_ by their paler green leaves,
which are distinctly incurved.

We propose the name “Wickens’ Aloe” for this species.

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No.
1449).

DESCRIPTION:--A stemless succulent herb. _Leaves_ pale glaucous-green,
40-50 in a dense rosette, 50-70 cm. long, 10-13 cm. broad at the base,
lanceolate-ensiform, erect, distinctly incurved, rather flat above,
convex beneath, beset on the margins with small deltoid black prickles
about 2 mm. long and about 6-8 mm. apart. _Inflorescences_ often 2-4
from the same rosette, spreading. _Peduncle_ laterally compressed,
naked, with usually two lateral branches, branches arcuateerect,
clothed with pale brown scariose broadly ovate-acuminate bracts.
_Raceme_ dense-flowered, 17-20 cm. long, conical-cylindric. _Bracts_
reflexed, 5-6 mm. long, ovate-cuspidate, scariose, pellucid. _Pedicels_
recurved, 3-4 mm. long. _Perianth_ 3·5 cm. long, cylindric-ventricose;
outer segments free for 16-17 mm., obtuse and recurved at the apex,
3-5-nerved; inner segments obtuse and recurved, 3-nerved. _Stamens_
projecting 11 mm. beyond the perianth and slightly recurved. _Style_
stout, strongly recurved. _Fruit_ 2·5 cm. long, 1·3 cm. in diameter,
oblong-ovoid.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 41.--Fig. 1, entire plant, much reduced; Fig. 2, raceme; Fig.
     3, portion of leaf; Fig. 4, transverse section of leaf; Fig. 5,
     bract; Fig. 6, open flower; Fig. 7, fruit showing remains of
     perianth attached.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _42._

M. Page del.]




PLATE 42.

COMMELINA BENGHALENSIS.

_Cape Province, Natal, Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMELINACEAE. Tribe COMMELINEAE.

COMMELINA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 847.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Commelina benghalensis=, _Linn. Sp. Pl._ 41; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vii. p. 9.

       *       *       *       *       *


A common species in certain habitats in South Africa, and extending to
Tropical Africa, throughout India to Japan, and the Moluccas. On account
of its easy cultivation and the exquisite deep shade of blue of the
petals, it deserves more recognition from gardeners, and should be at
least as great a favourite as species of _Tradescantia_ (The Wandering
Jew). The floral structure shows interesting modifications in the
stamens, and a study of the method of pollination would certainly bring
to light some interesting facts. This plant often produces at the base
modified (cleistogamic) flowers which burrow into the ground and produce
small capsules.

The original drawing from which our figure has been reproduced was
prepared by Miss Page and loaned by the Curator of the Bolus Herbarium.
The plants flowered in March and April at the National Botanic Gardens,
Kirstenbosch (No. 1232/18), and were sent by Mr. G. Hay from Louis
Trichardt, Transvaal.

DESCRIPTION:--A diffuse herbaceous plant. _Stem_ 15-80 cm. long.
_Leaves_ 3-8 cm. long, 1·5-3·5 cm. broad, ovate or elliptic-ovate,
acute, contracted at the base into a sheath often ciliate with reddish
hairs, and usually wavy margins. _Flowers_ partly enclosed in a green
hairy spathe, the topmost flower long-exserted. _Sepals_ 3; the two side
sepals more or less orbicular; the odd sepal elliptic. _Petals_ 3; the
two side petals dark blue, semi-orbicular, produced at the base into a
distinct claw; the odd petal small, ovate-elliptic. _Stamens_ 6, divided
into three sets; three stamens barren, forming staminodes; the three
side stamens blue; one stamen yellow, with two appendages at the back
of the anther. _Ovary_ sub-globose, 3-celled; style cylindric; stigma
simple. _Fruit_ obovoid, 3-celled. _Seeds_ more or less oblong,
wrinkled.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 42.--Fig. 1, inflorescence in bud; Fig. 2, the same with half
     of spathe removed; Fig. 3, side sepal × 2; Fig. 4, odd sepal × 2;
     Fig. 5, side petal × 2; Fig. 6, odd petal × 2; Fig. 7, stamens and
     pistil × 3; Fig. 8, small anther (blue) × 5; Figs. 9, 10, larger
     anthers (yellow), front and back view × 5; Fig. 11, fruit × 4; Fig.
     12, transverse section of fruit; Fig. 13, seed, enlarged.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _43._

M. Page del.]




PLATE 43.

HESSEA ZEYHERI.

_Cape Province, Little Namaqualand._

       *       *       *       *       *

AMARYLLIDACEAE. Tribe AMARYLLIDEAE.

HESSEA, _Herb._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 720.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Hessea Zeyheri=, _Baker_, _Handb. Amaryllid._ p. 23; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi.
p. 191.

       *       *       *       *       *


This is a very rare species here figured for the first time. It was
discovered by Carl Zeyher at Hardeveld in little Namaqualand about the
year 1847, and appears to have been unrecorded since then until recently
collected by Mr. E. B. Watermeyer. The genus _Hessea_ is endemic to
South Africa, and contains nine species found in the Cape Province,
Little Namaqualand, and one species from the Transvaal. Hitherto none
has been recorded from Natal or the Orange Free State. Our specimen
differs slightly from the original described in the “Flora Capensis” in
having three rather shorter leaves contemporary with the flowers. At
first the style is short, but elongates as the flowers mature.

Our illustration was prepared from a drawing by Miss M. Page of
specimens which flowered in April at the National Botanic Gardens,
Kirstenbosch (No. 1157/16), and collected by Mr. E. B. Watermeyer,
Nieuwoudtville, Calvinia Division. The drawing has been kindly loaned by
the Curator of the Bolus Herbarium.

DESCRIPTION:--_Bulb_ 5 cm. long, 3·5 cm. in diameter, sub-globose,
produced above into a short neck. _Leaves_ 3, contemporary with the
flowers, 5·5-11·5 cm. long, 0·8-16 cm. broad, strap-shaped, obtuse,
narrowing and channelled at the base. _Peduncle_ arising at the side of
the leaves, about 10 cm. long, flattened. _Spathe-valves_ 2 cm. long,
linear, acuminate. _Inflorescence_ an umbel of about 25 flowers.
_Pedicels_ 2-3 cm. long. _Perianth tube_ 3 mm. long; segments about 1
cm. long, oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, united to the staminal tube by the
midrib. _Stamens_ of two different lengths, the filaments united below
into a tube 4 mm. long; free portions of filaments 8 mm. and 5 mm.
long; anthers of long stamens globose, of short stamens oblong. _Ovary_
1·6 mm. in diameter, globose; style short in bud, lengthening to 15 mm.
in older flowers.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 43.--Fig. 1, section through perianth × 3; Fig. 2, lobe of
     perianth × 3.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _44._

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 44.

CEROPEGIA TRISTIS.

_Cape Province, Natal._

       *       *       *       *       *

ASCLEPIADACEAE. Tribe CEROPEGIEAE.

CEROPEGIA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 779.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Ceropegia tristis=, _Hutchinson_, sp. nov.; affinis _C. Haygarthii_,
Schlechter, sed foliis sub anthesi bene evolutis, calyce majori,
corollae lobis brevissime stipitatis differt.

     _Scandens_; caulis carnosus, glaber. _Folia_ breviter petiolata
     matura 3·5-6 cm. longa, 1·5-3·5 cm. lata, late oblonga vel
     oblongo-ovata, apice breviter apiculata, basi cordata, glabra;
     nervi laterales utrinsecus circiter 4, patuli; petioli circiter 1
     cm. longi. _Cymae_ axillares, triflorae; pedicelii usque ad 1·5 cm.
     longi, teretes, glabri. _Sepala_ lineari-filiformia, 3-4 mm. longa,
     glabra, marginibus leviter hyalinis. _Corolla_ basi subglobosa,
     supra basin curvato-erecta, circiter 6 cm. longa, superne
     turbinata, apice 2 cm. diametro, extra glabra, maculata, intra
     leviter pilosa, lobis e basi lata attenuatis in columnam brevem
     cohaerentibus, deinde apice corpusculam globosam 5-fenestratum
     ciliatam formantibus. _Corona_ exterior cupularis, lobis 5 latis
     emarginatis columna staminalis sequilonga intra pilis longis
     gracilibus ciliatis; corona interior erecta, lobis conniventibus
     apice recurvatis. _Follicula_ circiter 14 cm. longa,
     falcato-recurvata, apice sub-uncinata.--J. H.

       *       *       *       *       *

In our last number (Plate 39) we figured a species of _Ceropegia
Rendallii_, which belongs to a group of the genus characterised by
having the corolla-lobes united into an umbrella-like canopy supported
by five short stalks. The present species has the corolla-lobes free at
the base, then connate into a slender column, again becoming free and
then connate at the tips, forming a small terminal cage-like body.

It shares this character with _Ceropegia Haygarthii_, Schlechter, and in
this respect the two species are unique amongst the South African
species. In _C. Haygarthii_, however, the corolla is very widely globose
at the base, the calyx lobes are longer, and the peculiar stalk to the
corolla lobes is at least three or four times as long. These differences
seem to warrant the description of a new species. The curiously shaped
flowers should make this species an object of interest in the
greenhouse.

DESCRIPTION:--A climber. _Stem_ fleshy, glabrous. _Leaves_ shortly
petioled, 3·5-6 cm. long, 1·5-3·5 cm. broad, broadly oblong or
oblong-ovate, apex rounded and shortly pointed, cordate at the base,
glabrous; lateral nerves about four on each side; petiole about 1 cm.
long. _Inflorescence_ a 1-3-flowered axillary cyme; pedicels 1·2-1·5 cm.
long, terete, glabrous. _Sepals_ 4-5 mm. long, subulate, glabrous.
_Corolla_ abruptly bent at a right angle near the base; tube (following
the bend) 2·6 cm. long, globosely inflated at the base, widening upwards
and about 2 cm. in diameter at the mouth, glabrous without, finely
pilose within; lobes free at the base, abruptly inflexed over the mouth
of the tube and produced beneath into broad triangular partition-like
green plates or keels, meeting at the centre and connate into a slender
erect column about 2-3 mm. long, then again becoming free and expanding
into elliptic-lanceolate replicate segments, connate at the tips,
forming a small apical ellipsoid cage-like body, 5-8 mm. long, ciliate
on the margins. _Outer corona_ cupular, with five broad emarginate lobes
arising to the level of the staminal column, ciliate and hairy within
with long fine hairs; inner corona lobes about 2·5 mm. long, linear,
connivent-erect over the staminal column, with revolute tips.
_Follicles_ about 14 cm. long, strongly falcate, recurved at the tips.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 44.--Fig. 1, portion of stem with leaves and flowers, nat.
     size; Fig. 2, calyx; Fig. 3, lobe of corolla; Fig. 4, outer and
     inner corona; Fig. 5, staminal column; Fig. 6, pollinia; Fig. 7,
     follicles, nat. size. All enlarged with the exceptions of Figs. 1
     and 7.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _45._

M. Page del.]




PLATE 45.

WATSONIA GALPINII.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

IRIDACEAE. Tribe IXIEAE.

WATSONIA, _Mill._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. viii. p. 705.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Watsonia Galpinii=, _L. Bolus. Ann. Bolus Herb._ vol. iii. p. 11.

       *       *       *       *       *


We have pleasure in figuring in this number, through the kindness of the
Curator of the Bolus Herbarium, our first species of one of the most
popular of South African genera, namely, _Watsonia_. Species of this
genus have long been known in European Gardens, where they were
introduced by the early botanical collectors from the Cape. The genus is
represented in South Africa by about twenty species, and with the
exception of a species which occurs in Madagascar, are confined to the
sub-continent. The Watsonias lend themselves to hybridising, and some
very fine garden hybrids have been produced.

The species here figured was first discovered by Mr. E. E. Galpin at
Lottering Bush, Zitzikama (_Galpin_ No. 4698), and re-collected at
Knysna by Miss A. V. Duthie, who sent corms to the National Botanic
Gardens, where they flowered in March, 1919 (No. 239/18).

The general name of “pijpie” is applied to almost all species of
_Watsonia_ and also to some species of _Gladiolus_.

DESCRIPTION:--_Corm_ 2 cm. in diameter, depressed-globose, oblique at
the base. _Stem_ 75 cm. long, racemose. _Leaves_ 4-8, radical, up to 35
cm. long, 1-1·5 cm. broad, linear, acute, acuminate, with the median and
marginal nerves somewhat subprominent. _Inflorescence_ simple or
branched. _Spathe-valves_ herbaceous or submembranous at the apex; the
outer 0·6-3·2 cm. long, lanceolate, setaceous acuminate; the inner
0·8-1·4 cm. long, ovate or broadly ovate, acuminate. _Perianth-tube_ 2
cm. long, constricted about the middle; the lower half filiform,
scarcely 1·5 mm. in diameter; the upper half infundibuliform, 7 mm. in
diameter near the throat; lobes spreading, 1·5 cm. long; the outer up
to 8 mm. broad, suboblong, subacute, minutely apiculate; the inner 1 cm.
broad, oblong-obovate. _Stamens_ almost as long as the perianth lobes;
anthers 9 mm. long. _Ovary_ about 5 mm. long, subobconic; style 2·9 cm.
long; primary branches 9 mm. long; stigmas about 2 mm. long. _Fruit_ 1
cm. long, obconic.

Mrs. Bolus remarks, “Distinguished from the rest of the section
‘Eu-Watsonia’ by the more slender habit, the smaller spathe-valves, the
shorter perianth-tube and relatively long segments.”

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 45.--Fig. 1, flower, perianth laid open; Fig. 2, portion of
     fruiting spike; Fig. 3, capsule, dehisced, about natural size; Fig.
     4, seed × 2.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _46._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 46.

MASSONIA LATIFOLIA.

_Cape Province, Little Namaqualand._

       *       *       *       *       *

LILIACEAE. Tribe ALLIEAE.

MASSONIA, _Thunb._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 806.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Massonia latifolia=, _Linn. fil._ Suppl. 193; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 416.

       *       *       *       *       *


All the species of _Massonia_, an endemic Cape genus of the _Liliaceae_,
have fragrant hyacinthoid flowers, arising in a sessile cluster from
between two broad prostrate leaves. The name was given to the genus by
Carl Thunberg to commemorate the name of Francis Masson, who was sent to
the Cape in 1772 as collector for the Royal Gardens at Kew, and who was
responsible for introducing a large number of Cape plants into
cultivation. The first 20 volumes of Curtis’s _Botanical Magazine_,
which contain 786 plates, have nearly one-third devoted to figures of
Cape species, mostly sent to Kew Gardens by Masson.

The genus _Massonia_ is very imperfectly known, as about 24 out of the
33 species described in the “Flora Capensis” have never been collected
within the last 50 years, or are only known from figures in botanical
publications. It is, therefore, with some pleasure that we publish our
first plate representing a species of the genus, collected by Mrs. E.
Rood, of Van Rhynsdorp, in the hope that it may stimulate others to
forward specimens to the Division of Botany, Pretoria, for illustration
in future numbers of this work.

This particular species was figured by Jacquin in 1803. Specimens are
preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No. 1450).

DESCRIPTION:--_Bulb_ 3·5 cm. long, 3 cm. broad, ovoid-ellipsoid, with
brown membranous tunics. _Leaves_ 2, lying flat on the ground, somewhat
fleshy, 12 cm. long, 14·5 cm. broad, somewhat orbicular, narrowed and
channelled at the base, glabrous. _Inflorescence_ an abbreviated raceme.
_Bracts_ 3·5 cm. long, 1 cm. broad, lanceolate, acuminate, acute, about
5-nerved, glabrous. _Pedicels_ 6 mm. long, 4 mm. broad, fleshy.
_Perianth-tube_ 7 mm. long, 6 mm. in diameter at the throat; lobes 1·2
mm. long, 4 mm. broad, oblong, minutely tufted at the apex, membranous.
_Filaments_ inserted at mouth of perianth-tube, 1·4 cm. long, ovate and
connate at the base, becoming linear above; anthers 3 mm. long, linear,
versatile. _Ovary_ 5 mm. long, 7 mm. in diameter above, obovoid; style 2
cm. long, subterete; stigma simple.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 46.--Fig. 1, plant viewed from eye-level; Fig. 2, bract with
     flower; Fig. 3, section of flower; Fig. 4, flower, showing the
     filaments connate at the base; Fig. 5, apex of perianth lobe; Fig.
     6, bract; Fig. 7, plant viewed from above. All enlarged with the
     exception of Figs. 1 and 7.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _47_

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 47.

KNIPHOFIA ALOOIDES.

_Cape Province, Orange Free State, Transvaal, Basutoland, Natal._

       *       *       *       *       *

LILIACEAE. Tribe HEMEROCALLEAE.

KNIPHOFIA, _Moench._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 775.

       *       *       *       *       *

     =Kniphofia alooides=, _Moench. Meth._ 632; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p.
     283. _Tritoma Uvaria_, _Gawl. in Bot. Mag._ t. 758; _Kniphofia
     Uvaria_, _Hook. Bot. Mag._ t. 4816.

       *       *       *       *       *


We may perhaps be excused for figuring this species, which has appeared
as a plate more than once in Curtis’s _Botanical Magazine_. It is,
however, still such a favourite with cultivators that it is deemed
worthy of a figure in a South African publication. Like other of our
native plants it was known in European gardens many years ago, and is
recorded as having flowered at Kew Gardens in 1707. As a cultivated
plant it was known under the name of _Tritoma Uvaria_, which was later
changed to _Kniphofia Uvaria_. It was also described by Linnaeus about
the year 1735 as an _Aloe_. Specimens of the plant in cultivation may be
seen in many South African gardens. It is the most robust and most
variable species of the genus. In the coastal districts of Natal two
varieties, _nobilis_ and _maxima_, are found, but our figure and
description apply to the typical form. The common name is the “Red-hot
poker.” The natives of Natal know the plant as “i-Cacane.”

The plate was drawn from a specimen collected near Durban in July, 1914.

DESCRIPTION:--A perennial stemless plant with radical leaves, and long
naked peduncles, bearing a short spike of flowers at their apices.
_Rootstock_ thickened, not tuberous. _Leaves_ 30-45 cm. long, 1·5-1·8
cm. broad low down, strap-shaped, acuminate, sheathing at the base,
green, strongly and acutely keeled, with smooth margins. _Peduncle_ a
little shorter than the leaves, terete. _Inflorescence_ 5 cm. long,
dense, more or less cylindric. _Bracts_ 0·3-1·2 cm. long, 3-6 mm. broad,
ovate, obtuse or acute. _Perianth-tube_ 3-4 cm. long, 5 mm. in diameter
at the throat, more or less cylindric, 6-veined; lobes 2 mm. long,
ovate, obtuse. _Stamens_ 6, not all lengthening at the same time,
exserted in the lower flowers. _Ovary_ 3-celled, with many (12 or more)
ovules in each cell; style exserted in the lower flowers; stigma obtuse.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 47.--Fig. 1, plant, reduced; Fig. 2, inflorescence; Fig. 3,
     flower with subtending bract; Fig. 4, leaf; Fig. 6, gynaecium;
     Figs. 6 and 7, stamens, front and back view; Fig. 8, cross-section
     through the ovary.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _48_

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 48.

HELIOPHILA SCANDENS.

_Natal._

       *       *       *       *       *

CRUCIFERAE. Tribe SISYMBRIEAE.

HELIOPHILA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 81.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Heliophila Scandens=, _Harv. Thes. Cap._ vol. ii. p. 43, t. 166; _Bot.
Mag._ t. 7668.

       *       *       *       *       *


Harvey first described and figured this remarkable species of
_Heliophila_ in 1863, from specimens which he received from Mr. M‘Ken.
The late Dr. Medley Wood sent a plant of it to Kew in 1885, which
flowered in the succulent house the following year, and has continued to
do so about mid-winter ever since. From the plant which flowered at Kew
a plate was prepared for the _Botanical Magazine_, t. 7668.

According to the Kew authorities, in the whole of the large Natural
Order _Cruciferae_, embracing about 180 genera, only two are recorded as
having scandent species. They are the South African _Heliophila_ and the
Peruvian _Cremolobus_, and the scandent habit is exceptional in these
two genera.

The plant may be found in shady places amongst shrubs along the coast
near Durban and also at Inanda. The present plate was prepared from
specimens gathered near Durban in July, 1914. The species is popularly
known as the “Bridal Wreath.”

DESCRIPTION:--A climbing plant. _Stem_ brown; branches green, terete,
glabrous. _Leaves_ 2·5-5 cm. long, 1·2-2·5 cm. broad, oblong to
lanceolate, tapering at both ends, obtuse or acute, gradually passing
into a thickened, channelled and usually recurved petiole, glabrous.
_Flowers_ in axillary and terminal racemes; pedicels 1·2-2·5 cm. long.
_Sepals_ oblong, obtuse; the two lateral ones with thickened dorsal
wings. _Petals_ 0·8-1·2 cm. long, obovate-spathulate. _Long stamens_
half as long as the petals; short stamens 4 mm. long; anthers ovate.
_Ovary_ globose; style short; stigma capitate. _Fruit_ 4-5 cm. long,
elliptic-oblong, flat, tipped by a short straight style, 1-2-seeded.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 48.--Fig. 1, portion of plant, nat. size; Fig. 2, flower;
     Figs. 3, 4, and 5, stamens; Fig. 6, petal; Fig. 7, gynaecium; Fig.
     8, fruit. All enlarged with the exception of Fig. 1.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _49_

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 49.

HOLMSKIOLDIA SPECIOSA.

_Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

VERBENACEAE. Tribe VITICEAE.

HOLMSKIOLDIA, _Retz._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p.
1156.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Holmskioldia speciosa=, _Hutchinson et Corbishley in Kew Bull._ 1920, p.
332, Fig. 1.

       *       *       *       *       *


This beautiful and showy plant was first collected by Dr. I. B. Pole
Evans at Komati Poort in November, 1917, and specimens sent to Kew were
reported to be an undescribed species of the genus. Sir Wm. Hoy, the
General Manager of the South African Railways, presented two living
specimens to the Division of Botany, Pretoria, and our plate was
prepared from these plants when they flowered.

The plant is a large bush 10-20 ft. high, and when in full bloom is one
of the most conspicuous objects in the veld. The calyx in this species
very soon becomes almost fully developed, and the young corolla is at
first only visible as a minute ball at the base of the saucer-shaped
calyx.

_Holmskioldia_ is a small genus with a curious distribution. A handsome
species, _H. sanguinea_, Retz, occurs in the foothills of the Himalaya
mountains of India at an altitude of 3000-5000 ft. _H. tettensis_, _H.
spinescens_, and _H. mucronata_, Vatke, are found in the basin of the
Lower Zambesi and Shire Rivers, and there is an unnamed species in
Madagascar. The genus is very closely related to _Clerodendron_, largely
represented in all these areas.

DESCRIPTION:--_Branchlets_ woody, terete, shortly and softly pubescent,
marked with pale lenticels; internodes about 2 cm. long. _Leaves_
broadly ovate, triangular at the apex, broadly wedge-shaped at the base,
2·5-4 cm. long, 2-3 cm. broad, coarsely crenate, with few (about three)
rounded teeth, very shortly setulose above, paler below and
conspicuously glandular and shortly pubescent; lateral nerves about
three on each side of the midrib; petiole 7 mm. long, densely pubescent.
_Flowers_ few, arranged in axillary cymes about 4 cm. long; peduncles
slender, softly pubescent; lower bracts more or less leafy,
spathulate-obovate, up to 7 mm. long; pedicels up to 1·2 cm. long, with
two small opposite linear bracteoles above the middle. _Calyx_
pink-coloured, gradually enlarging, broadly top-shaped,
glandular-pubescent outside; tube 1 cm. long, with broadly rounded
lobes, the latter rigidly membranous in the fruiting stage and expanding
to 2·5 cm. _Corolla_ purple, 2-2·5 cm. long, glandular and softly
pubescent outside; tube up to 1·5 cm. long. _Stamens_ long exserted;
filaments glabrous. _Ovary_ hairy in the upper part; style a little
longer than the stamens, slender, glabrous. _Fruit_ truncate, 4-horned,
included by the accrescent calyx.--J. HUTCHINSON.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 49.--Fig. 1, calyx; Fig. 2, corolla bud; Fig. 3, stamen; Fig.
     4, pistil; Fig. 5, young fruit.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _50_

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 50.

RHAMPHICARPA TUBULOSA.

_Cape Province, Natal, Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

SCROPHULARIACEAE. Tribe GERARDIEAE.

RHAMPHICARPA, _Benth._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p.
969.

=Rhamphicarpa tubulosa=, _Benth. in Hook. Comp. Bot. Mag._ i. 368; _Harv.
Thes. Cap._ i. 36, t. 57; _Fl. Cap._ vol. iv. sect. 2, p. 399.

       *       *       *       *       *


This species belongs to a small genus of plants which are probably
parasitic or semi-parasitic herbs. Three species are known in South
Africa, and a few from Tropical Africa, East India, and Australia. _R.
tubulosa_ also occurs in Tropical, and is the most widely distributed
member of the genus in South Africa. In Natal it is always found in
moist ground, edges of pools, and similar habitats.

The plate was prepared from plants collected by the late Dr. Medley Wood
on the Berea Flats near Durban, Natal.

DESCRIPTION:--A herbaceous plant 12-60 cm. high. _Stem_ erect; simple or
occasionally sparsely branched, terete, sometimes furrowed on two sides,
glabrous or nearly so. _Leaves_ opposite or subopposite, exstipulate,
sessile or nearly so, 2·6-7·5 cm. long, up to 1·2 cm. broad, linear,
slightly narrowed at both ends, with entire margins and a prominent
midrib, glabrous. _Inflorescence_ a few-flowered raceme; pedicels
1·5-2·5 cm. long. _Calyx-tube_ 1·2 cm. long; lobes spreading,
lanceolate, a little shorter than the tube, keeled. _Corolla-tube_ about
2 cm. long, narrowly subcylindric, more or less curved, glabrous or
minutely puberulous; lobes 1·5 cm. long, 0·8 cm. broad, obovate,
rounded, the upper 2 connate high up. _Stamens_ 4, in 2 pairs; filaments
clothed with long hairs, the upper pair shorter than the lower pair;
anthers 1-celled, oblong, dorsifixed. _Ovary_ oblong-ovoid; style
terete; stigma thickened. _Capsule_ 1·2 cm. long, 8 mm. in diameter,
obliquely ovoid, obliquely beaked at the apex, glabrous.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 50.--Fig. 1, plant, natural size; Fig. 2, corolla, front
     view; Fig. 3, corolla, back view; Fig. 4, stamens; Fig. 5, corolla
     laid open; Fig. 6, gynaecium; Fig. 7, cross-section of ovary; Fig.
     8, calyx; Fig. 9, capsule. All enlarged except Fig. 1.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _51_

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 51.

GAZANIA SUBULATA.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

COMPOSITAE. Tribe ARCTOTIDEAE.

GAZANIA, _Gaertn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 459.

=Gazania subulata=, _R. Br. in Ait. Hort. Kew._ ed. II. vol. v. p. 140;
_Fl. Cap._ vol. iii. p. 473.

       *       *       *       *       *


The native species of _Gazania_ receive perhaps more attention from
gardeners than other groups of South African _Compositae_. This is due
to their easy cultivation and the brightness of their “flowers.” The
general names “Gousblom” and “Marigolds” are applied indiscriminately to
various species of _Gazania_, _Arctotis_ and _Dimorphotheca_.

Our plate was prepared from plants flowering at the Division of Botany,
Pretoria. The plant is acquiescent and forms a compact clump about 2
feet in diameter. It flowers freely and is easily propagated. We hope in
future numbers to illustrate all the better known kinds of “Gousblom,”
especially some of the beautiful Namaqualand species.

Our specimen bears out Harvey’s statement that this species and _G.
longiscapa_ are scarcely distinct, as it agrees with _G. subulata_ in
having the peduncle pilose and with _G. longiscapa_ in the
cartilaginous-ciliate leaves which are glabrous on the mid-rib below.

Specimens of the plant figured are preserved in the National Herbarium,
Pretoria (Herb. No. 1447).

DESCRIPTION:--An acaulescent plant. _Leaves_ radical, crowded, 10-40 cm.
long, 2-6 mm. broad, linear, subacute, with a short spine at the apex,
narrowed and channelled below and sheathing at the base, dark green and
glabrous above, white tomentose beneath, except on the midrib, with the
margins spinulose-ciliate. _Peduncle_ 24 cm. long, terete, hollow,
pilose on the uppermost third, with 1 or 2 bracts. _Involucral scales_
connate at the base; tube 1 cm. long, 7 mm. in diameter, glabrous,
intruse at the base; scales in three rows, 1-1·5 cm. long; the outer
linear-acuminate, acute, with spinulose margins; the inner ovate,
acuminate, acute, with membranous margins. _Receptacle_ convex,
honeycombed. _Ray-florets_ neuter, 3·2 cm. long; the limb 1·2 cm. broad,
obovate-oblong, obtuse, with a broad mouse-coloured band beneath and
about 15-veined. _Disc florets_ hermaphrodite, 1-2 cm. long; tube
5-angled; lobes 4 mm. long, linear-oblong, obtuse. _Anthers_ minutely
tailed at the base. _Pappus_ of delicate linear acuminate scales hidden
by the long hairs which cover the ovary. _Ovary_ densely villous; style
with a thickened ring about the middle; lobes linear, obtuse.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 51.--Fig. 1, flowers and leaves; Fig. 2, upper portion of
     style; Fig. 3, stamens; Fig. 4, longitudinal section of capitulum
     with hairs from ovary removed; Fig. 5, corolla laid open; Fig. 6,
     disc-floret, showing pappus, with hairs from the ovary removed;
     Fig. 7, plant, much reduced.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _52._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 52.

PELARGONIUM CRASSICAULE.

_South-West Africa._

       *       *       *       *       *

GERANIACEAE. Tribe PELARGONIEAE.

PELARGONIUM, _L’Her._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 273.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Pelargonium crassicaule=, _L’Her. Ger._ t. 36; _Fl. Cap._ vol. i. p. 299.

       *       *       *       *       *


This species of _Pelargonium_ is one of the many botanical curiosities
found in the arid regions of South-West Africa, where the native plants
have to contend against very adverse conditions. In the dry season the
plant loses its leaves and assumes a knobby appearance due to the thick
rather woody stems. The leaves appear after the rains and are more or
less crowded at the ends of the branches.

The species was first discovered by Mr. Ant. Hove in 1786 in South-West
Africa, and was introduced by him into Kew Gardens the same year. In
1799 a figure was published in the _Botanical Magazine_ (t. 477)
prepared from a plant which flowered with Messrs. Grimwood & Co.,
Kensington, London. Though this figure does not quite agree with our
specimen in the markings of the petals, we have no doubt that it
represents the plant here illustrated, which can only be considered as a
variety.

Our plant was collected by Dr. I. B. Pole Evans, C.M.G., who states that
it is common on rocky outcrops in the Nabib Desert at Luderitzbuch. It
has been established and flowered at the Gardens of the Division of
Botany, Pretoria. Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium,
Pretoria (Herb. No. 1452).

DESCRIPTION:--_Stems_ woody and swollen, with blackish bark. _Leaves_
crowded at the apex of the branches; petioles 4-11 cm. long, semiterete,
finely pilose with reflexed hairs; lamina 2-5 cm. long, 2-4·5 cm. broad,
rounded-ovate, slightly 3-lobed, rounded above, cuneate at the base and
merging into the petiole, with crinkled bluntly dentate margins and
prominent veins beneath, finely pilose above and below; stipules brown,
4 mm. long, acuminate from an ovate base. _Peduncle_ 7·5 cm. long,
terete, finely pilose with reflexed hairs, branching above. _Involucral
bracts_ 1·2 cm. long, lanceolate, acute, pilose. _Umbel_ 6-flowered;
pedicels about 1-2 cm. long. _Flowers_ faintly sweet scented. _Petals_
1·25 cm. long, 6 mm. broad, obovate, rounded or truncate at the apex;
the three lower produced into a linear claw 2 mm. long; the two upper
slightly connate. _Calyx-tube_ 2 mm. long, terete, pilose; sepals all
pilose; upper sepal erect, 8 mm. long, 2·5 mm. broad, ovate-lanceolate,
obtuse; lower and lateral sepals reflexed, 8 mm. long, 1·5-2 mm. broad,
lanceolate, obtuse. _Stamens_ 7, in three rows of 2, 3 and 2; filaments
linear, 4·7 mm. long, connate at the base; anthers 1·75 mm. long,
oblong; staminodes 3, shorter than the filaments. Ovary 1·5 mm. long,
densely pilose above; styles united for 1·5 mm. and then separating into
6 stigmas 1·5 mm. long.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 52.--Fig. 1, plant as it appears in dry seasons; Fig. 2,
     plant with leaves and flowers; Fig. 3, lamina of leaf; Fig. 4,
     involucre at base of flowers; Fig. 5, back view of flower; Fig. 6,
     petals; Fig. 7, calyx with stamens; Fig. 8, filaments and
     staminodes; Fig. 9, gynaecium.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _53._

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 53.

ANDROCYMBIUM MELANTHIOIDES.

_Cape Province, Natal, Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

LILIACEAE. Tribe ANGUILLARIEAE.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANDROCYMBIUM, _Willd._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p.
822.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Androcymbium melanthioides=, _Willd. in Ges. Naturf. fr. Berl. Mag._ vol.
ii. p. 21; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 517.

       *       *       *       *       *


The genus _Androcymbium_ is represented by about eighteen species, two
of which are known from the Mediterranean Region and two from Tropical
Africa, the remainder of the species being confined to South Africa.

Our plate was prepared from specimens collected by Dr. I. B. Pole Evans
at Silverton, near Pretoria, in May, 1921, and represents the best known
and most widely distributed species of the genus. The plant shows the
characteristic habit of all the species, viz. stemless, with the flower
head hidden by large bracts which may be white, green, or purplish. In
cultivation it does not lend itself to planting out, but makes a
striking and pleasing object when placed singly in pots.

Specimens of the plant figured are preserved in the National Herbarium,
Pretoria (Herb. No. 1451).

DESCRIPTION:--A stemless plant. _Bulb_ about 1·5 cm. in diameter,
globose, covered with more or less hardened black tunics. _Leaves_ 2-3,
14-22 cm. long, linear from an ovate base, acutely acuminate, glabrous.
_Bracts_ white or purplish, several, 3-8·5 cm. long, ·8-3·5 cm. broad,
oblong, ovate-oblong or ovate, obtuse or sometimes apiculate at the
apex, sometimes acuminate, many nerved (up to 50-nerved). _Head_ about
6-flowered, hidden and overtopped by the bracts. _Bracts_ subtending the
flowers about 3·5 cm. long, lanceolate, acute, 5-nerved. _Pedicel_ 3 mm.
long, 2·5 mm. broad above, obovoid, fleshy. _Perianth segments_ produced
into a distinct claw; claw 5 mm. long, 1 mm. broad, with a more or less
distinct keel; blade 6 mm. long, 3 mm. broad, ovate, cucullate,
acuminate, 3-keeled. _Stamens_ inserted at the junction of the claw and
blade; filaments 9 mm. long, terete; anthers 3 mm. long, elliptic.
_Ovary_ 6 mm. long, 2·5 mm. in diameter, ellipsoid, subtrigonous; styles
free, 8 mm. long, terete; stigma simple,

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 53.--Fig. 1, plant viewed from above (reduced); Fig. 2,
     inflorescence; Fig. 3, flower with bract; Fig. 4, perianth segment
     with stamen, front view; Fig. 5, perianth segment with stamen, side
     view; Fig. 6, gynaecium.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _54._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 54.

MESEMBRYANTHEMUM ALOIDES.

_Bechuanaland._

       *       *       *       *       *

FICOIDEAE. Tribe MEBEMBRYANTHEMEAE.

MESEMBRYANTHEMUM, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f._ vol. i. p. 853.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Mesembryanthemum aloides=, _Haw. Suppl._ p. 88; _Fl. Cap._ vol. ii. p.
396.

       *       *       *       *       *


This extremely rare plant, which was first found by Burchell at
Metlowing and at Jabirn Fontein, near Takun in Bechuanaland, in 1812,
was recently rediscovered by Dr. I. B. Pole Evans near Postmas Berg, and
has been established in the garden of the Division of Botany, Pretoria.
In the _Journal of the Linnean Society_ (vol. xlv. p. 123) for 1920, Mr.
N. E. Brown gives a fuller description of the species based mainly on a
coloured drawing of the plant made by Burchell, who states that the
roots are “eaten by natives as a substitute for better food.”

The specimen from which the present plate was prepared flowered at
Pretoria in August, and has enabled us to draw up a more complete
description.

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium.

DESCRIPTION:--A stemless plant. _Root_ thick and woody. _Leaves_ tufted,
8-12 in a cluster, forming a rosette about 9 cm. in diameter, 3-5·5 cm.
long, 1-1·7 cm. broad in the widest part, lanceolate-spathulate viewed
from above, acuminate, obtuse, mucronate at the apex and shaped like the
bow of a boat, slightly narrowed at the base and sheathing, flat above,
keeled beneath, dotted with white spots on both surfaces. _Flowers_
lemon-yellow, sessile between the leaves. _Calyx-tube_ 2·2 cm. long,
widening from a cylindrical base to 1·2 cm. in diameter above, sparsely
pustulate above; lobes of two different lengths, pustulate; the longer
1·7 cm. long, ovate, acuminate; the shorter 9 mm. long with membranous
margins. _Corolla_ 2·5 cm. in diameter when expanded; petals up to 1 cm.
long, 1 mm. broad, linear, obtuse. _Filaments_ about 5 mm. long, hairy
at the base. _Ovary_ 10-celled; styles 10 free. _Fruit_ not seen.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 54.--Fig. 1, calyx and calyx lobes; Fig. 2, petal; Fig. 3,
     stamen; Fig. 4, top of ovary showing styles; Fig. 5, transverse
     section of ovary; Fig. 6, longitudinal section of leaf; Fig. 7,
     transverse section of leaf near the apex; Fig. 8, apex of leaf.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _55._

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 55.

ALOE STRIATA.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

LILIACEAE. Tribe ALOINEAE.

ALOE, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 776.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Aloe striata=, _Haw. in Trans. Linn. Soc._ vol. vii. p. 18; _Syn._ p. 81;
_Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 311.

       *       *       *       *       *


This is the well-known “Coral Aloe” of South Africa. It is typical of
both the Upper and Lower Karroo regions and also of the Namaqualand
region. The species is generally found on dry rocky slopes, and the
plants assume a subdecumbent position, very rarely growing erect. It is
the only South African species of _Aloe_ which bears leaves without
prickly teeth. In the dry summer season the leaves lose their
bluish-grey colour and become a copper-red, which gives the plants a
very characteristic appearance in the veld. A large number of hybrids
have been raised by crossing this species with others belonging to the
_Saponaria_ group, and a hybrid, described as _Aloe Lynchii_, was
obtained between this and _Gasteria verrucosa_.

The late Prof. MacOwan states that sun-birds (_Nectarineae_) are the
pollinating agents of _Aloe striata_ and some other species of _Aloe_,
and if the birds are kept away by covering the inflorescence with wire
netting, few or no capsules are produced.

Our specimen was collected by Dr. I. B. Pole Evans at Dassie Deur near
Port Elizabeth, and flowered in the garden of the Division of Botany,
Pretoria, in August.

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium.

DESCRIPTION:--_Stem_ underground. _Leaves_ about 13, crowded in a basal
rosette, up to 30 cm. long, 6-11·5 cm. broad, oblong, oblong-lanceolate,
or the inner ovate, acuminate, flat, bluish-grey, glaucous, faintly
many-nerved, with pink margins. _Peduncle_ about 24 cm. long, branched
above; at the base flat on one side, convex on the other; in the upper
portion semiterete. _Inflorescence_ a panicle of racemes, the ultimate
racemes 6-9 cm. long, lax. _Bracts_ subtending the racemes about 1 cm.
long, membranous, ovate, acuminate. _Floral bracts_ 3 mm. long, ovate,
acuminate, acute, membranous. _Pedicels_ about 1 cm. long, spreading.
_Flowers_ more or less pendulous. _Perianth-tube_ in mature flowers 2
cm. long, globose at the base, then slightly constricted, then gradually
widening into a tube 6 mm. in diameter at the throat; lobes about 3 mm.
long, ovate, rounded at the apex. _Stamens_ included or slightly
exserted; filaments attached at the base of the perianth-tube, 1·7 cm.
long; anthers about 1 mm. long. _Ovary_ 5 mm. long, oblong; style 1·7
cm. long, terete; stigma faintly 3-lobed. _Immature fruit_ 2 cm. long,
1·1 cm. in diameter, ellipsoid, subtrigonous.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 55.--Fig. 1, plant showing characteristic habit; Fig. 2,
     transverse section of leaf; Fig. 3, flower; Fig. 4, bract; Fig. 5,
     stamen; Fig. 6, young fruit.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _56._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 56.

POLYXENA HAEMANTHOIDES.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

LILIACEAE. Tribe SCILLEAE.

POLYXENA, _Kunth._; _Benth. et Hook. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 807.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Polyxena haemanthoides=, _Baker in Hook. Ic._ t. 1727; _Fl. Cap._ vol.
vi. p. 420.

       *       *       *       *       *


This rare species was recently collected by Dr. Marloth in the Calvinia
Division, and to our knowledge has not been collected since the late Dr.
Bolus discovered it on the Nieuwveld Mountains near Fraserburg over
thirty years ago. _Polyxena_ is a small endemic genus of about a dozen
species, the majority of which are very little known, as most of them
have not been collected since they were first found by the early Cape
botanical collectors. Baker, who described and figured this species in
Hooker’s _Icones_, remarks, “The affinity of this interesting novelty is
evidently close with _Massonia rugulosa_ of Lichtenstein and _M.
marginata_ of Willdenow, of neither of which we possess specimens in the
Kew Herbarium.” Both of them fall under the genus _Polyxena_, as defined
in the _Genera Plantarum_. Specimens preserved in the National
Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No. 1448).

DESCRIPTION:--_Bulb_ about 3-4 cm. in diameter, ovoid. _Leaves_ two,
lying flat on the ground, 7 cm. long, 2·5-3 cm. broad, lanceolate or
ovate-lanceolate, acute, narrowing at the base, glabrous, about
10-nerved, with scabrous margins. _Inflorescence_ a contracted raceme,
about 12-flowered. _Bracts_ white, 5 mm. long, ovate, acuminate.
_Flowers_ sessile; perianth-tube 1·3 cm. long, 3·5 mm. in diameter,
slightly compressed; lobes in 2 rows, 9 mm. long, 3 mm. broad,
lanceolate-oblong, obtuse, glandular at the apex. _Stamens_ in a single
row; filaments united into a tube at the base, 1·5 cm. long; anthers 3
mm. long, linear, versatile. _Ovary_ 6 mm. long, oblong in outline;
style 1·5 cm. long, terete; stigma simple.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 56.--Fig. 1, leaf; Fig. 2, inflorescence showing coma; Fig.
     3, flower; Fig. 4, flower in longitudinal section; Fig. 5, upper
     portion of perianth showing stamens and style; Fig. 6, apex of
     perianth lobe.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _57._

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 57.

DIMORPHOTHECA SPECTABILIS.

_Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

COMPOSITAE. Tribe CALENDULACEAE.

DIMORPHOTHECA, _Moench._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p.
453.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Dimorphotheca spectabilis=, _Schltr. in Journ. Bot._ vol. xxxv. p. 220
(1897).

       *       *       *       *       *


For quite a considerable time this common and well-known _Dimorphotheca_
was placed in herbaria under the name of _Dimorphotheca Ecklonis_, and
Harvey, who examined specimens of this plant collected by Burke and
Zeyher on the Aapies River and Magaliesberg, also included it under _D.
Ecklonis_. Dr. Schlechter first recognised that the Transvaal plant was
an undescribed species, but apparently did not realise that Burke and
Zeyher had collected the plant close on a hundred years ago, as he
founded his description on specimens collected by Mr. E. E. Galpin,
F.L.S., in 1887, on the Saddleback Mountains, Barberton.

_Dimorphotheca spectabilis_ is a spring flowering plant, and is common
around Pretoria during the months of September and October. It is a
well-grown plant with large mauve flowers, and if introduced into
cultivation would be an acquisition to any garden. The plant sets seed
freely, and could easily be raised by this means. The species is
poisonous, and in experiments carried out by the Division of Veterinary
Research, the plant was found to cause death in sheep fed on it.

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No.
1470).

DESCRIPTION:--An herbaceous plant 24-40 cm. high with one or more stems
arising from the apex of a stout deep underground root. _Stem_ terete,
faintly furrowed, covered with short glandular hairs. _Leaves_ 2-4 cm.
long, ·6-1 cm. broad, lanceolate or lanceolate-ovate, obtuse, tapering
upwards from a broad base, sometimes slightly narrowed at the base, with
a prominent midrib and two faint lateral nerves more distinct on the
upper surface, punctate-glandular on both surfaces, and with glandular
hairs beneath, ciliate with glandular hairs. _Flower head_ solitary at
the ends of the stems. _Peduncle_ 6-10 cm. long, terete, furrowed,
glandular-pubescent. _Involucral-scales_ in 2 rows, somewhat connate at
the base, 1·3-2 cm. long, ovate, acuminate, acute with membranous
margins, glandular-pubescent. _Receptacle_ 7 mm. broad, convex, hollow.
_Ray florets_ female. _Corolla-tube_ 2 mm. long, cylindric,
glandular-pilose; limb 2 cm. long, 4 mm. broad, linear, 3-toothed at the
apex, glandular-pilose on the back at the base. _Style_ as long as the
corolla-tube. _Disc florets_ hermaphrodite. _Corolla-tube_ 5 mm. long,
cylindric, constricted and narrower near the base, sparsely covered with
glandular hairs on the broader portion of the tube; lobes 2 mm. long,
almost 1 mm. broad, lanceolate, obtuse. _Filaments_ 4 mm. long, linear;
anthers 3·5 mm. long, with deep golden-yellow pollen. _Pappus_ none.
_Ovary_ 3 mm. long, flattened, winged and 2-horned at the apex; style 6
mm. long, cylindric; lobes 1 mm. long, truncate at the apex. _Fruit_ 1·5
cm. long, flattened, orbicular, with a circular wing.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 57.--Fig. 1, whole plant showing habit (reduced); Fig. 2,
     flower bud; Fig. 3, disk flower; Fig. 4, ray flower with ovary
     removed.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _58._

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 58.

MIMETES CAPITULATA.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

PROTEACEAE. Tribe PROTEAE.

MIMETES, _Salisb._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 171
(partly).

       *       *       *       *       *

=Mimetes capitulata=, _R. Br. in Trans. Linn. Soc._ vol. x. p. 106; _Fl.
Cap._ vol. v. sect. i. p. 644.

       *       *       *       *       *


The genus _Mimetes_ constitutes a small group of South African
Proteaceae of nine species, all confined to the South-Western area of
the Cape Province. The genus was first founded by Salisbury, but for
over one hundred years afterwards plants belonging to two other distinct
genera were placed under the name _Mimetes_. One of these, _Orothamnus
Zeyheri_, we figured on Plate 38 of this work. Like a great many other
groups of South African plants the species of _Mimetes_ have not been
extensively collected, and we are indebted to Mr. T. P. Stokoe, of Cape
Town, who has rediscovered so many interesting plants on the Hottentot
Hollands Mountains, for the opportunity of figuring the present species.
The examination of the fresh material has enabled us to add a few
descriptive details to the description given in the _Flora Capensis_.

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No.
1457).

DESCRIPTION:--_Branches_ villous. _Leaves_ 1·2-3 cm. long, ·5-1·5 cm.
broad, lanceolate, lanceolate-ovate or ovate, gradually narrowed to an
obtuse callous apex, a little narrowed at the base, entire, coriaceous,
indistinctly 3-nerved, densely adpressed-villous with silky hairs.
_Heads_ sessile, 2·5-3·3 cm. long, 10-16 flowered, in the axils of the
leaves at the ends of the branches. _Involucral-bracts_ 5-6-seriate,
varying from linear-lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, more or less
narrowed at the base, membranous, pubescent outside, long-ciliate.
_Receptacle_ long-setose. _Perianth-segments_ free or nearly so, 2·5-3
cm. long, linear-filiform, slightly widened for about 5 mm. at the
base, plumose, limb about 4 mm. long, linear-lanceolate, subacute,
long-villous on the back. _Anthers_ subsessile, about 2 mm. long,
linear, with a lanceolate, subacute, concave apical gland. _Hypogynous
scales_ 1 mm. long, linear, obtuse, white. _Ovary_ 2 mm. long, oblong in
outline, pubescent; style 4 cm. long, subcylindric above, furrowed on
the lower half and usually twisted at the junction with the ovary,
swollen with an ellipsoid portion below the stigma, glabrous; stigma
about 4 mm. long, furrowed, with an oblique ovoid acuminate subacute
apex and with a distinct collar at the base.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 58.--Fig. 1, capitulum; Fig. 2, a single flower showing
     portion of hairy receptacle; Fig. 3, perianth segment; Fig. 4,
     pistil.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _59._

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 59.

ERYTHRINA CAFFRA.

_Cape Province, Natal, Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

LEGUMINOSAE. Tribe PHASEOLEAE.

ERYTHRINA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 531.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Erythrina caffra=, _Thunb. Fl. Cap._ p. 559; _Fl. Cap._ vol. ii. p. 236;
_Wood, Natal Plants_, pl. 542.

       *       *       *       *       *


This species is a common tree in the eastern parts of the Cape Province
and also in the coastal and midland districts of Natal. The plant is
known as the “Kaffir Boom,” and to children in Natal as “Cookie
Doodles.” The Zulu name for the tree is “Umsini.”

The wood is very soft, and the only use to which it is put is for
fencing poles, as it easily takes root and is free from the attack of
termites. The scarlet seeds are strung as necklaces.

In various parts of the country the tree may be seen in cultivation, and
when in full bloom the bright scarlet flowers make it extremely
ornamental. The tree is deciduous and the flowers appear in spring while
the plant is still leafless, but occasionally leaves and flowers may be
produced at the same time.

Our plate was prepared from material collected by Miss K. A. Lansdell on
the Berea, Durban, Natal. Specimens are preserved in the National
Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No. 1456).

DESCRIPTION:--A tree 6-17 m. high. _Branches_ pale-coloured, rugose,
prickly, the prickles dark-coloured, up to 7 mm. or more long, broad at
the base, usually a little curved, very sharp. _Leaves_ clustered near
the ends of the twigs, trifoliolate: common petiole up to 21 cm. long,
unarmed; terminal leaflet 6·5-9 cm. long, 9-11·5 cm. broad, ovate or
sometimes sub 3-lobed, usually acuminate, more or less cuneate at the
base, glabrous with two small glands at the base of the petiolule;
lateral leaflets 6·5-9 cm. long, 6·5-9 cm. broad, similar in shape to
the terminal leaflet, usually acuminate, glabrous. _Inflorescence_ a
many-flowered dense raceme, 4·6 cm. long; flowers pendulous: peduncle
dark brown, 7·5-15 cm. long, terete, velvety. _Calyx_ up to 1 cm. long,
more or less tubular campanulate, 2-lipped, velvety-brown outside.
_Vexillum_ up to 5 cm. long, 2·5 cm. broad when expanded, conduplicate,
falcate; alae yellow-green, 4-8 mm. long, oblong, curved; carina
equalling the alae. _Stamens_ 10, exserted; the vexillary filament free
to the base. _Ovary_ stalked, villous; stigma simple. _Legume_
few-seeded, constricted between the seeds. _Seeds_ scarlet, with a black
hilum.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 59.--Fig. 1, vexillum; Fig. 2, carina; Fig. 3, wing; Fig. 4,
     calyx; Fig. 5, stamens; Fig. 6, gynaecium; Fig. 7, fruit, showing
     one seed.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _60._

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 60.

SPARAXIS GRANDIFLORA.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

IRIDACEAE. Tribe IXIEAE.

SPARAXIS, _Ker_; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 708.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Sparaxis grandiflora=, _Ker in Konig and Sims’ Ann._ i. 225; _Fl. Cap._
vol. vi. p. 116.

       *       *       *       *       *


The plant here figured was introduced into Kew Gardens in the year 1758.
Though it has been more than once illustrated in botanical publications,
we do not apologise for reproducing this coloured illustration of one of
the common bulbs found in so many gardens at the Cape. The species
_grandiflora_ is represented by many colour varieties, and is probably
the same as the plant described as _Spiraxis tricolor_, which only
appears to differ from it in the colour markings on the perianth. The
variety here figured is probably the form originally described under the
name _Spiraxis atropurpurea_.

The specimens were collected by Dr. R. Marloth, who forwarded them to
the Division of Botany, Pretoria, where they flowered in August. They
are preserved in the National Herbarium (Herb. No. 1454).

DESCRIPTION:--_Bulb_ 1·3 cm. long, 1·3 cm. in diameter, covered with
light-coloured fibrous tunics. _Leaves_ about 10 to a bulb, distichous;
the lower leaves about 5 cm. long and 4 mm. broad; the upper up to 26
cm. long and 1·2 cm. broad; all linear, acuminate, acute, with a
distinct midrib and the inner margin membranous, sheathing at the base,
glabrous. _Inflorescence_ shorter than the upper leaves; peduncle about
12 cm. long, clasped and hidden by the inner leaves. _Flowers_ about 6
to an inflorescence, purple. _Bracts_ membranous, 1 cm. long, awned or
lacerated with the awns up to 1·2 cm. long. _Perianth-tube_ 9 mm. long,
cylindric in the lower half, campanulate in the upper half; lobes 1·5
cm. long, 7 mm. broad, spathulate-obovate. _Stamens_ attached to the
throat of the perianth-tube; filaments 9 mm. long; anthers 1·3 cm.
long, linear, eared at the base. _Ovary_ 4 mm. long, 2·5 mm. in
diameter, oblong; style 1·5 cm. long, terete; stigmas 8 mm. long.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 60.--Fig. 1, perianth laid open; Fig. 2, bract; Fig. 3,
     stamen; Fig. 4, style and stigmas.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _61._

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 61.

CORYCIUM CRISPUM.

_Cape Province, Little Namaqualand._

       *       *       *       *       *

ORCHIDACEAE. Tribe OPHRYDEAE.

CORYCIUM, _Sw._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 683.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Corycium crispum=, _Sw. in Vet. Acad. Handl. Stockh._, 1800, 222; _Bolus,
Orchids of South Africa_, vol. i. t. 45; _Fl. Cap._ vol. v. sect. 3, p.
286.

       *       *       *       *       *


This extremely pretty little orchid was sent to us by Mrs. E. Rood from
Van Rhynsdorp in August. Though the late Dr. Bolus published a figure of
this species in his “Orchids of South Africa,” we again reproduce a
plate of the plant, and it is the first member of the family
_Orchidaceae_ to appear in this work. The species is fairly common in
the Cape Province extending from the Cape Peninsula up to Clanwilliam
and Van Rhynsdorp and into Little Namaqualand. It has been known to
botanical science for a considerable time, and was first described under
its present name over 100 years ago.

The species belongs to the large group of terrestrial orchids which are
characteristic of the south-western region of the Cape Province, the few
epiphytic orchids which are found in South Africa being mostly confined
to the forest regions of the Eastern Province and the Northern
Transvaal.

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No.
1467).

DESCRIPTION:--_Plant_ up to 18 cm. high. _Tuber_ 3 cm. long, 1·5 cm. in
diameter, egg-shaped. _Leaves_ cauline, somewhat spreading and
imbricate, 8-10 cm. long, 2·5 cm. broad, linear-lanceolate to ovate,
very acuminate, with undulate margins. _Inflorescence_ 9-10 cm. long,
many-flowered. _Bracts_ 2 cm. long, 1·7 cm. broad, ovate, shortly
acuminate, as long as the ovary. _Flowers_ sessile. _Dorsal sepal_ 8 mm.
long, linear; lateral sepals connate into a bilobed limb, erect in young
flowers, becoming deflexed in older flowers. _Side petals_ 8 mm. long, 6
mm. broad above, deeply concave and saccate at the base; lip adnate to
the column, horizontal, with a limb 5 mm. broad from a distinct claw.
_Arms of rostellum_ rounded, recurved and projecting into the concavity
of the side petals.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 61.--Fig. 1, bract; Fig. 2, petal; Fig. 3, dorsal sepal; Fig.
     4, lip; Fig. 5, ovary; Fig. 6, column showing anthers; Fig. 7,
     column showing stigmas; Fig. 8, side view of column.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _62._

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 62.

ALOE EXCELSA.

_Rhodesia._

       *       *       *       *       *

LILIACEAE. Tribe ALOINEAE.

ALOE, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 776.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Aloe excelsa=, _Berger in Notizblatt. Berl. Bot. Gart. u. Museums_, vol.
iv. (1906) 247; _Das Pflanzenreich_, vol. iv. 38, p. 314.

       *       *       *       *       *


This arborescent Aloe forms one of the most conspicuous features of the
vegetation of the Matoppos in Rhodesia in July and August, when it
brightens up the Kopjes with its crimson flowers. Full-grown plants vary
in height from 15-20 feet, and one of their chief characteristics is the
graceful recurving of the ends of the leaves. Our illustration is made
from one of the many plants of this species which adorn the rockeries of
the Union Buildings, and which were collected by Mr. J. Wickens on the
Matoppos. The plants thrive well in Pretoria, and attract consideration
through their deep carmine inflorescence. They flower in Pretoria during
August and September.

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium (Herb. No. 1453).

DESCRIPTION:--Aborescent up to 5-6·3 m. high. _Stems_ about 3-4 cm. in
diameter. _Leaves_ crowded and forming a rosette at the end of the stem
up to 0·2 m. long, 8-9 cm. broad at the base, gradually narrowing to the
apex, lanceolate-ovate, acuminate, with the uppermost third gracefully
recurved, deeply channelled above, convex beneath, with spines along the
margin and with spines on the under surface; spines 4 mm. long, 5 mm.
apart below and about 2·6 cm. apart on the upper portion of the leaf.
_Inflorescence_ a panicle; peduncle 13-16 cm. long, compressed, convex
on both surfaces, with a prominent ridge on either side. _Bracts_ ovate,
acute, membranous. _Ultimate racemes_ 22-25 cm. long, 5·5 cm. in
diameter, cylindric, densely many-flowered. _Floral-bracts_ brown,
about 5 mm. long, 5 mm. broad at the base, ovate, acute. _Flowers_
subsessile; perianth-tube 1 cm. long, 5 mm. in diameter, oblong in
outline; lobes 1·8 cm. long, 0·6 mm. broad, oblong, obtuse, 3-nerved,
the outer with a small rostrate body just below the apex; the inner
perianth-segments free to the base. _Ovary_ 5 mm. long, 3 mm. broad,
oblong; style 2·7 cm. long, cylindric; stigma simple.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 62.--Fig. 1, plant much reduced; Fig. 2, stamens; Fig. 3,
     perianth-segments; Fig. 4, apices of outer and inner
     perianth-segments; Fig. 5, flower; Fig. 6, bract; Fig. 7, leaf;
     Fig. 8, transverse section of leaf.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _63._

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 63.

GLADIOLUS ALATUS, _var._ NAMAQUENSIS.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

IRIDACEAE. Tribe IXIEAE.

GLADIOLUS, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 709.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Gladiolus alatus, var. namaquensis=, _Baker in Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 159;
_G. namaquensis, Ker. in Bot. Mag._ t. 592.

       *       *       *       *       *


This plant is a variety of the Cape “Kalkoentje” (_Gladiolus alatus_),
and might conveniently be called the “Namaqua Kalkoentje.” This
particular variety has been known for almost 200 years, and in the
Banksian Herbarium in the British Museum is a well-preserved specimen
which was collected by Masson in Namaqualand. A figure of the plant
prepared from specimens which flowered in England was published in the
_Botanical Magazine_ in 1801.

In the veld groups of plants are usually found together, each forming a
corm which has developed as an offshoot from the parent corm. This
character would render the plant easy of propagation.

We are indebted to Mrs. E. Rood of van Rhynsdorp for specimens which
were received by the Division of Botany in September, 1921. They are
preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No. 1468).

DESCRIPTION:--_Corm_ covered with fibrous tunics. _Stem_ with a basal
sheath 2·5-3·5 cm. long. _Leaves_ four, decreasing in size upwards; the
outermost leaf 13-15 cm. long, 2·5-3 cm. broad; upper leaves 7-12 cm.
long, ·5-2·1 cm. broad, all lanceolate, acuminate, clasping and equitant
at the base, 5-nerved, with reddish margins; the innermost almost wholly
clasping. _Visible peduncle_ about 11 cm. long, 3-flowered.
_Outer-bracts_ 4 cm. long, 2 cm. broad, boat-shaped, acuminate, sharply
keeled, with keel and margins reddish-brown; inner similar to the outer
but bifid at the apex. _Perianth-tube_ 1 cm. long, cylindric below,
campanulate above; upper segments 2·5 cm. long, 2·2 cm. broad, ovate,
subacuminate; 2 lower segments 2 cm. long, 5 mm. broad above, obovate,
narrowed into a long linear claw; the lowermost segment 1·1 cm. broad,
ovate, subacuminate. _Filaments_ 1·5 cm. long, cylindric; anthers 1·3
cm. long, linear. _Ovary_ 8 mm. long, 2·5 mm. in diameter, narrowly
ellipsoid; style 3 cm. long, filiform; lobes 5 mm. long, linear,
slightly broadened above, rounded and bifid at the apex.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 63.--Fig. 1, corm; Fig. 2, lower perianth-segment; Fig. 3,
     lateral perianth segment; Fig. 4, stamens, front and side view;
     Fig. 5, style and stigmas.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _64._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 64.

GAZANIA PYGMAEA.

_Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

COMPOSITAE. Tribe ARCTOTIDEAE.

GAZANIA, _Gaertn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 459.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Gazania pygmaea=, _Sond. in Linnaea_, vol. xxiii. p. 69; _Fl. Cap._ vol.
iii. p. 478.

       *       *       *       *       *


During the month of September the veld round Pretoria is carpeted with
the white flowers of this little _Gazania_. It is one of the first, if
not the first plant to flower on burnt veld, and the contrast in colour
between the white flowers and the young green grass is very striking.
While so extremely common during the spring months, this species appears
to be little known botanically. It was evidently first collected by the
botanist Karl Zeyher on the Magaliesberg about the year 1841, and the
description in the _Flora Capensis_ based on Zeyher’s specimen is the
most recent published information we have about this species. The plants
are tufted, several underground stems arising from a stout tap-root.

The present plate was prepared from specimens collected by Mr. D. Fouche
on the outskirts of Pretoria. Specimens are preserved in the National
Herbarium, Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--Acaulescent plants with several subterranean stems from
the apex of the deep tap-root. _Leaves_ crowded, radical, 2·5-6·5 cm.
long, 3-5 mm. broad, linear, with an acute callous at the apex,
attenuated at the base, somewhat channelled above, hispid on the upper
surface, woolly-canescent beneath except on the midrib, entire,
spinulose-ciliate. _Heads_ many to each root. _Peduncle_ about 3·5 cm.
long, sparsely woolly, especially beneath the involucre, or subglabrous.
_Involucral-tube_ 7 mm. long, 6 mm. in diameter, turbinate; lobes in 4
rows; outer lobes 6 mm. long, 1 mm. broad, linear, obtuse,
spinulose-ciliate; inner lobes 4 mm. long, 2 mm. broad, ovate, obtuse
with reddish-brown membranous margins. _Ray-florets_ neuter, white with
a purplish band beneath; corolla tube 7 mm. long, cylindric; limb 1·7
mm. long, 4·5 mm. broad, lanceolate, bifid at the apex, with each lobe
minutely 2-toothed, about 7-nerved and distinctly 2-keeled beneath.
_Disc-florets_ hermaphrodite; corolla-tube 6 mm. long, subcylindric,
somewhat 5-angled, glabrous; lobes 1·5 mm. long, ·5 mm. broad,
lanceolate, obtuse. _Pappus_ of hyaline linear scales 1·5 mm. long.
_Ovary_ covered with long silky hairs; style 7 mm. long, cylindric
(lengthening with age); stigmas ·75 long, linear, obtuse.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 64.--Fig. 1, young flower head; Fig. 2, section through
     involucre; Fig. 3, flower head just before opening; Fig. 4, surface
     view of flower head; Fig. 5, corolla of ray-florets; Fig. 6, disc
     floret; Fig. 7, leaf; all variously enlarged.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _65._

K.A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 65.

ORNITHOGALUM THUNBERGIANUM.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

LILIACEAE. Tribe SCILLEAE.

ORNITHOGALUM, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p.
815.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Ornithogalum Thunbergianum=, _Baker in Journ. Linn. Soc._ vol. xiii. p.
269; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 497.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Ornithogalum Thunbergianum_, the “Yellow Chinkerichee,” is found in the
Malmesbury, Paarl, and Van Rhynsdorp Districts of Cape Province. It was
found by Carl Thunberg at Saldana Bay about the year 1772, and named by
him _O. maculatum_, but as this specific name had already been given to
a plant figured by Jacquin, the late Mr. Baker redescribed the species
here dealt with and named it after Thunberg, although there is some
doubt as to whether the plant figured by Jacquin is specifically
distinct from _O. Thunbergianum_.

The perianth is a beautiful “flame scarlet” colour with a black mark at
the tip of the three outer segments. The species should be grown by all
lovers of our native flora, and would well repay cultivation.

We are indebted to Mrs. E. Rood, Van Rhynsdorp, for specimens which
enabled us to prepare the present plate. Specimens are preserved in the
National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No. 1469).

DESCRIPTION:--_Bulb_ 2-3 cm. long, 2-3 cm. in diameter, ovoid or
compressed-globose, covered with thin membranous tunics. _Leaves_
withering at time of flowering, 5-10 cm. long, 1 cm. broad below,
ovate-linear, tapering to an acute apex, glabrous, glaucous-green.
_Peduncle_ 12-38 cm. long, terete, rigid, glabrous. _Inflorescence_
2-6-flowered. _Bracts_ membranous, 2·3-2·5 cm. long, linear-oblong,
acuminate, more or less clasping and equalling the pedicel. _Pedicels_
1·7 cm. long, terete, the lower somewhat arcuate. _Perianth segments_
2-2·3 long, ·8-1 cm. broad; the outer obovate-oblanceolate, subacute,
with a black mark at the apex; the inner ovate-lanceolate. _Filaments_ 7
mm. long, cylindric, slightly narrowing above; anthers 3 mm. long.
_Ovary_ 8 mm. long, 5 mm. in diameter, ellipsoid; style 2 mm. long;
stigma trigonous.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 65.--Fig. 1, stamens; Fig. 2, gynaecium; Fig. 3, bract.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _66._

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 66.

FERRARIA ANTHEROSA.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

IRIDACEAE. Tribe MOROEEAE.

FERRARIA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 692.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Ferraria antherosa=, _Ker. in Bot. Mag._ 751; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 29.

       *       *       *       *       *


Our species was first figured in Curtis’ _Botanical Magazine_ in 1804
from a plant which was raised in Salisbury’s garden at Brompton,
England. It is not at all a well-known plant, as it is only recorded in
the _Flora Capensis_ as having been collected by Zeyher in the
Clanwilliam District, and by Ecklon at Groenkloof in the Malmesbury
District. The plant from which our plate was prepared was sent to the
Division of Botany, Pretoria, by Mrs. E. Rood from Van Rhynsdorp. The
genus _Ferraria_ is represented in South Africa by six species, and by
one species in Angola. The flowers last only for a very short time after
opening, but a succession of flowers appears on each plant. None of the
species can be called ornamental from a gardener’s point of view, but
the structure of the flower is very beautiful and the colouring quaint.
Plants would only be grown as a botanical curiosity, and not for their
beauty. Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria
(Herb. No. 1471).

DESCRIPTION:--_Corms_ several arranged one on top of the other, discoid,
about 3·5 cm. in diameter. _Plant_ about 23 cm. high. _Leaves_ three,
17-26 cm. long, linear and 1 cm. broad above, subacute, equitant and
clasping the stem below. _Bracts_ subtending the inflorescences,
resembling the leaves. _Bracts_ subtending the ultimate inflorescence
5-8 cm. long, 1·6-2·6 cm. broad, elliptic, boat-shaped, with membranous
margins. _Perianth segments_ 2·5 cm. long, forming a campanulate portion
1·5 cm. long and 1·3 cm. in diameter, then spreading into a horizontal
portion; the spreading portion 1·4 cm. long, 1·4 broad, ovate, subacute,
with frilled margins. _Staminal tube_ 1·6 cm. long, cylindric, anther
lobes diverging. _Ovary_ cylindric, with a beak 3 cm. long; stigmas
long-fimbriated.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 66.--Fig. 1, corms; Fig. 2, flower; Fig. 3, top of style
     showing stigmas and anthers; Fig. 4, stigma.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _67._

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 67.

HARVEYA SQUAMOSA.

_Cape Province, Natal, Little Namaqualand._

       *       *       *       *       *

SCROPHULARIACEAE. Tribe GERARDIEAE.

HARVEYA, _Hook._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 967.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Harveya squamosa=, _Steud. Nomencl. Bot. ed._ 2, i. 723: _Fl. Cap._ iv.
sect 2, p. 413.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Genus _Harveya_ contains 27 species, all of which are parasitic on
the roots of other plants. In South Africa 21 species are recorded, the
remainder being found in Tropical Africa and the Mascarene Islands. The
name was given by Sir William Hooker in commemoration of Dr. Harvey, who
was one of the pioneers of South African systematic botany. The plant
belongs to a group known as total parasites, _i.e._ it is wholly
dependent on its host for its food supply. Specialised roots technically
known as “haustoria” penetrate the roots of the host plant and absorb
the requisite food material.

The species here figured occurs in the Cape Peninsula, all along the
western coastal districts to Clanwilliam and Van Rhynsdorp and into
Little Namaqualand. It has also been recorded from the sand-dunes near
Durban in Natal. The specimens from which our plate was prepared were
collected by Mrs. E. Rood at Van Rhynsdorp, and are preserved in the
National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No. 1456).

DESCRIPTION:--A herbaceous plant about 13 cm. high. _Scale leaves_ 8 mm.
long, 1 cm. broad, ovate, acuminate, pubescent without. _Inflorescence_
racemose, densely many-flowered, 2·5 cm. in diameter, more or less
cylindric; axis 1 cm. in diameter near base, narrowing upwards. _Bracts_
1-2 cm. long, ·5-·9 cm. broad, oblong or obovate-spathulate, obtuse,
glandular pilose without; bracteoles 2, opposite at base of the calyx, 3
cm. long, 1·5 mm. broad, linear, glandular-pilose. _Pedicels_ 1 cm.
long, fleshy. _Calyx-tube_ 2·5 cm. long, 7 mm. in diameter, tubular,
glandular-pilose without, glabrous within; lobes 1·5-1·7 cm. long, 3
mm. broad at the base, gradually tapering from a triangular base.
_Corolla-tube_ 3 cm. long, 4 mm. in diameter, tubular, glandular-pilose
without and also within about the middle; lobes 4 mm. long, 5 mm. broad,
semiorbicular, rounded above, somewhat concave, glandular-pubescent
without. _Stamens_ attached to the middle of the corolla tube; filaments
of 2 different lengths; the longer 1·6 cm. long; the shorter 1·3 cm.
long; all sparsely covered with glandular hairs; anthers with one
fertile lobe and one unfertile lobe. _Ovary_ 5 mm. long, 4 mm. in
diameter; style 2·5 cm. long, terete, sparsely covered with a few
glandular hairs; stigma clavate, faintly 2-lobed.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 67.--Fig. 1, showing haustoria attached to portion of host;
     Fig. 2, single flowers showing bract and bracteoles; Fig. 3, bract;
     Fig. 4, bracteole; Fig. 5, calyx laid open; Fig. 6, corolla; Fig.
     7, corolla laid open; Fig. 8, stigma; Figs. 9, 10, portion of
     filaments with anther; Fig. 11, style and ovary.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _68._

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 68.

GLADIOLUS PRITZELII.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

IRIDEAE. Tribe IXIEAE.

GLADIOLUS, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 709.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Gladiolus Pritzelii=, _Diels in Engl. Bot. Jahrb._ vol. xliv. p. 118.

       *       *       *       *       *


This graceful little _Gladiolus_ was first found by Diels at Hantams
Berg, Calvinia District, and described by him in 1909, and in September
1921 the plant was again collected by Dr. R. Marloth in the same
locality. It belongs to the same group in the genus as _G. spathaceus_
(the Caledon Bluebell), and _G. involutus_ (the George Bluebell), having
the same bell-shaped flowers. In the original description the plant is
said to be one-flowered, but in the specimens received from Dr. Marloth
the spikes were 2-4-flowered.

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No.
1459).

DESCRIPTION:--_Corm_ globose, 2 cm. long, 2·2 cm. in diameter, with
fibrous tunics produced into a short neck. _Leaves_ two to each plant;
the lower about 5 cm. long, spathaceous, clasping the stem, minutely
pubescent and with hyaline margins; the upper 26-43 cm. long, free for
14-24 cm. above, linear, acute, with two prominent ribs above and
beneath. _Spikes_ 2-4-flowered. _Outer spathe valve_ membranous, 3 cm.
long, 8 mm. broad, lanceolate, many-veined, with membranous margins,
glabrous; inner valve 2 cm. long, hyaline-membranous. _Perianth-tube_ 7
mm. long, curved, cylindric below, becoming campanulate above.
_Posterior-lobes_ 1·5 cm. long, 1 cm. broad, obovate, subacuminate,
obtuse; anterior lobe 2·3 cm. long, 1·3 cm. broad, obovate, rounded
above, hooded; side lobes 1·5 cm. long, 1·3 cm. broad, obovate, shortly
and bluntly acuminate. _Anthers_ projecting beyond the junction with
the filament. _Ovary_ 3 mm. long, ellipsoid; style terete; stigmas
spathulate, 2-lobed.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 68.--Fig. 1, front view of flower; Fig. 2, perianth laid
     open; Fig. 3, upper part of style, showing stigmas; Fig. 4,
     anthers.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _69._

S Gower del.]




PLATE 69.

GAZANIA PAVONIA.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

COMPOSITAE. Tribe ARCTOTIDEAE.

GAZANIA, _Gaertn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 459.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Gazania Pavonia=, _R. Br. in Ait. Hort. Kew._ 2, vol. v. p. 140; _Fl.
Cap._ vol. iii. p. 476.

       *       *       *       *       *


This extremely handsome species of _Gazania_ was cultivated by Mr. C. N.
Knox-Davies in Johannesburg from plants collected at Worcester in the
Cape Province. The plants form a dense mass, and are suitable either for
growing in a border or in large pots. The ray florets are a beautiful
nopal red, with a warm sepia-brown eye-spot at the base, and when the
plants are in full bloom they present a very striking appearance. It is
surprising that species of this genus, which are amongst the most
handsome of the South African Compositae, have received so little
attention from horticulturists, and though hundreds of our native plants
have been figured in the _Botanical Magazine_ only two species of
Gazania have been illustrated.

Mr. N. E. Brown, who contributed an account of the genus to _The
Garden_, wrote that “it is one of the most perplexing that a botanist
has to deal with,” and even to-day the species are very imperfectly
known. Our plant was submitted to Kew for verification of the name, and
the Director reports, “The _Gazania_ has not been exactly matched, but
might be regarded as a form of _G. Pavonia, R. Br._”

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No.
1473).

DESCRIPTION:--_Plant_ compact, decumbent, forming a clump about 30 cm.
in diameter. _Leaves_ crowded near the apex of short shoots, 6-10 cm.
long, pinnatisect, slightly broadened and clasping at the base; lobes
1-2·5 cm. long, 2·5-4 mm. broad, linear, subacute, woolly-tomentose
beneath except on the mid-rib, sparsely woolly above, at length
becoming glabrous. _Peduncle_ 9 mm. long, terete, sparsely woolly, at
length becoming glabrous. _Tube of involucre_ 9 mm. long, 8 mm. in
diameter, sparsely woolly, intruse at the base; lobes in three rows; the
outer 4 mm. long, less than 1 mm. broad, linear, subacute; the innermost
ovate, subacuminate, subobtuse, with reddish-brown margins.
_Ray-florets_ neuter, corolla tube 7 mm. long, cylindric; limb red with
a dark-coloured mark at the base, 1·9 cm. long, 8 mm. broad, obovate,
rounded and minutely 3-fid at the apex, with two prominent veins
beneath. _Disc-florets_ hermaphrodite. _Corolla-tube_ 7 mm. long, more
or less angled, glabrous; lobes ·5 mm. long, ovate, subacute. _Anthers_
3 mm. long. _Pappus_ of long delicate linear scales connate in the lower
half and encasing the base of the corolla tube, free in the upper half.
_Ovary_ densely clothed with long silky hairs; style elongating up to
1·3 cm. long, filiform; stigmas about 0·75 mm. long.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 69.--Fig. 1, limb of ray flower; Fig. 2, longitudinal section
     of involucre; Fig. 3, ray flower; Fig. 4, segment of leaf enlarged.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _70._

K A Lansdell del.]




PLATE 70.

OCHNA PRETORIENSIS.

_Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

OCHNACEAE. Tribe OCHNACEAE.

OCHNA, _Schreb._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 317.

       *       *       *       *       *

     =Ochna pretoriensis=, _Phillips_, sp. nov. _Rami_ glabri. _Folia_
     1·5-3·8 cm. longa, 0·5-1·7 cm. lata, lanceolata, obovata, elliptica
     vel oblanceolata, apice obtusa, basi cuneata, marginibus serratis.
     _Flores_ solitarii vel 2-nati. _Pedicelli_ 1-1·5 cm. longi, basi
     articulati. _Sepala_ 7-8 mm. longa, 4·5 mm. lata, ovata vel
     elliptica, apice rotundata, aliquando 2-3-lobata. _Petala_ 1·5 cm.
     longa, 9·5 mm. lata, obovata, apice rotundata, basi unguiculata.
     _Filamenta_ 4·5 mm. longa, apice articulata. _Ovarium_
     4-5-loculare; stylus 5 mm. longus, apice 4-5-lobatus.

       *       *       *       *       *


This _Ochna_, which is found in the Transvaal around Pretoria and at
Messina, has hitherto been confused with _O. atropurpurea_, but is
easily distinguished from that species by the larger more expanded
flowers and the non-pustulate branches. The latter character
distinguishes _O. atropurpurea_ from all the other South African species
of the genus.

Our plate was prepared from specimens collected on Meintjes Kop,
Pretoria, by Mr. D. J. Fouche in September, 1921. It is a low spreading
bush, and at this time of the year is one mass of sweet-smelling yellow
flowers. The leaves do not appear until December or January, and it is
then that the green sepals enlarge and turn a blood-red colour and
surround the black fruit. The plant, therefore, either in flower or
fruit makes a very ornamental shrub and well worth the attention of
cultivators.

The genus _Ochna_ contains several species producing valuable timber.

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. Nos.
1422, 1491).

DESCRIPTION:--_Branches_ with light to dark brown bark, peeling off in
membranous strips, not pustulate. _Leaves_ 1·5-3·8 cm. long, ·5-1·7 cm.
broad, lanceolate, obovate, elliptic, or oblanceolate (mostly
oblanceolate), obtuse at the apex, cuneate or more rarely rounded at the
base, with serrated margins and with the mid-rib distinct and the
lateral veins evident. _Flowers_ solitary, very rarely paired, arising
at the apex of abbreviated shoots. _Pedicels_ 1-1·5 cm. long,
articulated at or 1-2 mm. above the base. _Sepals_ 7-8 mm. long, 4-5 mm.
broad, ovate or elliptic, rounded at and sometimes 2-8-lobed at the
apex, enlarging in the fruit. _Petals_ 1·5 cm. long, 9·5 mm. broad,
obovate, rounded at the apex, narrowed at the base into a claw.
_Filaments_ 4·5 mm. long, articulated at the apex; anthers 2 mm. long,
oblong. _Ovary_ of 4-6 carpels; style 5 mm. long; stigmas as many as the
carpels. _Fruit_ 7-8 mm. long, 5-6 mm. broad, more or less ellipsoid.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 70.--Fig. 1, fruiting branch; Fig. 2, flower with petals
     removed; Fig. 3, sepal; Fig. 4, petal; Figs. 5 and 6, stamens; Fig.
     7, gynaecium.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _71._

S Gower del.]




PLATE 71.

DAUBENYA AUREA, _var._ COCCINEA.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

LILIACEAE. Tribe ALLIEAE.

DAUBENYA, _Lindl._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 807.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Daubenya aurea=, Lindl., _var._ =coccinea=, _Marloth_ comb. nov.

_Daubenya coccinea, Harv. Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 417.

       *       *       *       *       *


This rare and interesting plant was found by Dr. R. Marloth in the
Calvinia District. An examination of fresh specimens has enabled us to
reduce the three species described in the “Flora Capensis” to a single
species, and the genus _Daubenya_ therefore becomes one of South
Africa’s monotypic genera. Our conclusions have been confirmed by
independent observations made by Dr. Marloth, and we give below the
notes he forwarded to the Division of Botany.

“The colour of the flower is the most brilliant scarlet known in the
Flora of South Africa, and especially dazzling when seen in full
sunlight. This effect is due to the combination of two pigments in the
subepidermal tissues of the flower, viz. a granular yellow pigment
distributed through all the cells, and a bright red solution present in
most of the cells of the subepidermal layer, but absent in others. This
peculiarity of structure also explains the occurrence of plants with
yellow flowers, for if through some cause or other (as a sport), the red
pigment is not produced, the flower is plain yellow, just as in such a
case the flower of the red _Watsonia_ (_W. rosa_) becomes pure white
(Arderne’s Watsonia). It so happened that the yellow form was first
introduced into England and described by Lindley as _Daubenya aurea_
(1835), hence this name has to be retained for the species, although the
flower is generally scarlet, and the yellow form has only arisen as a
sport. There is, however, no structural difference between _D. aurea_
Lindl., _D. coccinea_ Harv., and _D. fulva_ Lindl.”

The length of the floral segments and of the peduncle, given as
distinguishing characters by Lindley, is very variable in the specimens
seen by us (over one hundred); some of them are scarlet, others yellow,
and some dull orange. The scent of the flowers is unpleasant, somewhat
recalling that of the flowers of _Rhus_.

The home of this remarkable plant was unknown to botanists until
re-discovered in 1920. It grows in heavy red clay soil on the farm
Fransplaas, about 40 miles north of Sutherland, and flowers in
September.

The genus was named by Dr. Lindley in honour of Dr. Charles Daubeny,
Professor of Botany at Oxford, “whose interesting researches in
vegetable Chemistry have materially conduced to improve our knowledge of
the physiology of plants.”

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No.
1458).

DESCRIPTION:--An acaulescent herbaceous plant. _Bulb_ 1·6 cm. long, 1·9
cm. in diameter, covered with brown membranous tunics with numerous
fibrous roots from the base. _Leaves_ 2, flat, 5-8 cm. long, 4-5 cm.
broad, ovate, subacuminate, obtuse, narrowed and clasping at the base,
many-nerved, with margins narrowly membranous. _Capitulum_ about
10-flowered, with a peduncle 3 cm. long, clasped by the leaf base and
beneath the soil. _Outer bracts_ white, membranous, 2·7 cm. long, 1·6
cm. broad, oblong; inner bracts 2·5 cm. long, 9 mm. broad,
obovate-spathulate, entire, clasping the perianth-tube. _Pedicels_ 5 mm.
long, 3 mm. broad, compressed, fleshy. _The outer flowers_ 2-lipped and
differently shaped from the inner. _Perianth-tube_ of outer flowers 2
cm. long, 4 mm. in diameter, somewhat compressed; lobes of lower lip 2·6
cm. long; the middle lobe 1·4 cm. broad; the 2 side lobes 1 cm. broad;
all obovate-oblong, obtuse; lobes of upper lip 3 mm. long, 1 mm. broad,
linear. _Perianth-lobes_ of inner flowers 3-6 mm. long, all linear or
lanceolate. _Stamens_ inserted at different levels; filaments 3-6 mm.
long, terete, fleshy, tapering upwards; anthers 2 mm. long, oblong.
_Ovary_ 7 mm. long, 2·5 mm. in diameter, narrowly ellipsoid, glabrous;
style 2·5 cm. long, terete, with 3 minute stigmas at the apex.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 71.--Fig. 1, plant viewed from above; Fig. 2, plant, side
     view; Fig. 3, a single flower; Fig. 4, side view of flower of outer
     whorl; Fig. 5, flower from middle of inflorescence; Fig. 6, the
     same flower viewed from above, showing the stamens and style; Fig.
     7, bract.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _72._

K A Lansdell del.]




PLATE 72.

STAPELIA PILLANSII, _var._ ATTENUATA.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

ASCLEPIADACEAE. Tribe STAPELIEAE.

STAPELIA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 784.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Stapelia Pillansii=, _N. E. Br._, _var._ =attenuata=, _N. E. Br._ in _Fl.
Cap._ vol. iv. sect. i. p. 958.

       *       *       *       *       *


This interesting _Stapelia_ was first discovered by Mr. N. S. Pillans,
of Cape Town, at Witte Poort in the Laingsburg Division, and described
by Mr. N. E. Brown, to whom Mr. Pillans sent most of his collections of
this group. Our plant is one of the larger-flowered species of the
genus, resembling in this respect _S. gigantea_ and _S. nobilis_, but
differing in colour from both these species. The flowers have a distinct
carrion-like odour, although this is not so strong as in many other
species of the genus. When in bud the petals form an acuminate beak
recurved at the apex. Under cultivation in the greenhouse the stems turn
a dark reddish-brown colour.

Our specimen was collected by Dr. I. B. Pole Evans at Laingsburg, and
flowered at the Division of Botany, Pretoria, in October, 1921.
(National Herbarium, Pretoria, Herb. No. 1492.)

DESCRIPTION:--_Stems_ 9-15 cm. high, 1·4-2·2 cm. in diameter, 4-angled
and with concave sides, pubescent, usually green. _Teeth_ with erect
whitish rudimentary leaves about 2 mm. long. _Flowers_ 2 (4 or 5
according to Brown) from near the base of the stems. _Pedicels_ 3-4 cm.
long, terete, pubescent. _Sepals_ 1·7 cm. long, 2 mm. broad at the base,
linear-lanceolate, acuminate, acute, pubescent. _Corolla_ when expanded
22·5 cm. in diameter, diamine-brown above, smooth and without markings,
glabrous; lobes 10·5 cm. long, 2·2 cm. broad at the base, ovate,
tapering to a long point, strongly revolute, ciliate with short hairs
and with longer vibratile hairs. _Corona_ dark coloured; outer corona
lobes 4 mm. long, 2 mm. broad, oblong, bluntly 3-lobed at the apex; the
middle lobe the largest; inner corona-lobes 7 mm. long, 3 mm. broad,
obovate, flattened and appearing to stand at right angles to the outer
lobes, on either edge produced into a beak; the inner beak longer than
the outer and recurved over the flattened portion of the corona; the
outer beak entire or irregularly 2-3-lobed.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 72.--Fig. 1, corona; Fig. 2, lobe of inner corona; Fig. 3,
     lobe of _outer corona_.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _73._

M. M. Page del.]




PLATE 73.

MESEMBRYANTHEMUM CRASSIPES.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

FICOIDEAE. Tribe MESEMBRYEAE.

MESEMBRYANTHEMUM, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p.
853.

       *       *       *       *       *

     =Mesembryanthemum crassipes=, _Marloth_, sp. nov. habitu _M.
     rosulati_ (Kensit in Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Afr. i. p. 155, pi. xxib)
     et _M. calcarei_, Marl. (Flora of S. A. vol. i. pl. 52) sed foliis
     cuneatis aspero-marginatis et floribus roseis 5-meris distincta.

     _Planta_ subacaulis, ramis paucis brevissimis e radice crasso
     carnoso ramoso. _Folia_ in rosulam aggregata, plana, cuneata,
     crassa, suberecta, apice retusa vel rotundata, apicem versus
     margineque tuberculis minutis griseis numerosis munita. _Flores_
     apice ramulorum solitarii. _Calyx_ 5-fidus, lobis subaequalibus
     triangularibus, colore griseo foliorum. _Petala_ lanceolata,
     uniseriata, saturate rosea. _Stamina_ incarnata basin versus
     barbata. _Stigmata_ 8-10, filiformia, staminibus aequilonga.

       *       *       *       *       *


This is a beautiful plant when in flower, owing to the contrast between
the deep pink petals and the rugose grey leaves. It was collected on a
stony plain of grey shale near Sutherland, at an altitude of 4600 feet,
by Dr. R. Marloth, and flowered in his garden at Cape Town in September,
1921.

DESCRIPTION:--_Root_ thick, fleshy, simple or branched up to 30 mm. in
diam. and 20 cm. long. _Stem_ none, but one or more short branches
arising from the crown of the caudex. _Leaves_ crowded, 6-10 on a
branch, mostly erect and exposing the margin to the midday sun, cuneate,
gradually narrowed to the base, the apex straight or slightly rounded,
occasionally with a blunt mucro; the apical portion, and especially the
apical margin, closely covered with fine tubercles; on the wild plant
the entire leaf greyish-green, the margin reddish. _Flowers_ solitary on
each branch, sessile or subsessile, supported by 2 connate leaf-like
bracts. _Calyx_ turbiniform, 10-12 mm. long, the tube 11-13 mm. in diam.
at the mouth; sepals 5, of which 3 nearly equal, the 2 others narrower,
all triangular, 10 mm. long and wide, with a very narrow hyaline margin
and a thick umbo below the apex, finely tuberculate like the leaves,
grey, the margin red. _Petals_ uniseriate, narrow-lanceolate or
spathulate, 13-14 mm. long and 2-2·5 mm. wide in the middle, deep pink
on the inner side, paler on the outer side. _Stamens_ white, bending
inwards near the base and then erect, bearded at the bend. _Styles_
8-10, filiform, 6 mm. long, arising from the apex of the conical ovary.
Total diam. of open flower 20-25 mm., opening in the sun and closing
towards evening for several days.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 73.--Fig. 1, longitudinal section through the flower; Fig. 2,
     calyx; Fig. 3, gynaecium; Figs. 4, 5, 6, 7, petals and stamen; Fig.
     8, entire leaf; Fig. 9, cross-sections of leaf.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _74._

S Gower del.]




PLATE 74.

LEUCOSPERMUM TOTTUM, _var._ GLABRUM.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

PROTEACEAE. Tribe PROTEEAE.

LEUCOSPERMUM, _R. Br._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p.
170.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Leucospermum tottum=, _R. Br._, _var._ =glabrum=, _Phillips_, var. nov. a
typo ramis glabris, bracteis eciliatis differt.

       *       *       *       *       *


This interesting _Leucospermum_ was collected by Mr. T. P. Stokoe in Jan
du Toit’s Kloof near Chavonnesberg, in the Western Province. Mr. Stokoe
states that only a few plants were observed growing in a belt of
_Proteaceae_. It is evidently very closely related to _L. tottum_, from
which it differs in having glabrous branches and non-ciliate involucral
bracts, and should be regarded as a glabrous variety of this species.
The genus _Leucospermum_ is closely related to _Protea_ (see plate 22)
but differs from that genus in having the limb of the posticous segment
divided and not completely fused. The well-known “Kreupelboom” (_L.
concospermum_) belongs to this genus.

The variety here figured might be regarded as one of the more striking
plants in the genus _Leucospermum_. The yellow styles with red stigmas
projecting from an involucre tinged with delicate shades of red and
green give a particularly pleasing effect.

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No.
1493).

DESCRIPTION:--A spreading bush 5-6 ft. high. _Branches_ glabrous.
_Leaves_ 8-8·5 cm. long, O·9-1 cm. broad, broadly linear, 3-toothed at
the apex, slightly narrowed at the base with the midrib distinct
beneath, veins faint above. _Heads_ solitary or 2-nate, 7-8 cm. long
including the peduncle and styles, about 5·5 cm. in diameter. _Peduncle_
2 cm. long, loosely covered with ovate subacuminate obtuse glabrous
bracts 8 mm. long and about 8 mm. broad. _Receptacle_ 2·2 cm. long, 7
mm. broad, cylindric, densely villous on the back with long white hairs.
_Perianth-tube_ 1 cm. long, glabrous; segments 2·5 cm. long, linear,
villous and long ciliate; lobes 3 mm. long, oblong, subacuminate,
ciliate and bearded. _Ovary_ 1 mm. long, villous; style 4·5 cm. long,
terete, glabrous; stigma ovoid, subacuminate, obtuse.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 74.--Fig. 1, a single flower; Fig. 2, flower bud; Fig. 3,
     limb of posticous segment; Fig. 4, one lobe of limb showing stamen;
     Fig. 5, floral bracts; Fig. 6, longitudinal section of receptacle;
     Fig. 7, involucral bract; Fig. 8, stigma, side view; Fig. 9,
     stigma, front view.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _75._

S Gower del.]




PLATE 75.

ORNITHOGALUM ROODEAE.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

LILIACEAE. Tribe SCILLEAE.

ORNITHOGALUM, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p.
815.

       *       *       *       *       *

     =Ornithogalum Roodeae=, _Phillips_, sp. nov. _Bulbus_ globosus,
     albus. _Folia_ 3, ad 26 cm. longa, basi 2·5 cm. lata, lanceolata,
     acuminata, glabra. _Pedunculus_ ad 25 cm. longus, glaber.
     _Inflorescentia_ 4 cm. longa, circiter 6 cm. lata. _Bracteae_
     1·4-2·5 cm. longae, ovato-lanceolatae, acuminatae, membranaceae.
     _Pedicelli_ 1·1-2·5 cm. longi. _Segmenta_ perianthii 1·2 cm. longa,
     4 mm. lata, oblongo-lanceolata, apice papillosa. _Filamenta_ 8 mm.
     longa, basi 1·5 lata, lanceolata, acuminata. _Ovarium_ 5 mm.
     longum, 2.5 mm. latum, glabrum; stylus 6 mm. longus; stigma
     semiglobosum, papillosum.

       *       *       *       *       *


This handsome _Ornithogalum_ was collected by Mr. E. Rood at Van
Rhynsdorp, and forwarded to the Division of Botany, Pretoria. The
perianth segments are a deep reddish-brown, edged with white, and the
flowers are extremely fragrant. Specimens were sent to Kew, and the
Director reports that the plant had not been matched, the nearest
affinity being _O. suaveolens_, Jacq., and that it was evidently a new
species. This species exhibits a device for cross-pollination by the
movement of the style. As soon as the flower opens the style bends
downwards, and is thus in a position to receive pollen from the abdomen
of a visiting insect. As the flowers wither the perianth segments close
up, and the style becomes erect and would then be self-pollinated if
cross-pollination has not taken place.

DESCRIPTION:--_Bulb_ 2·2 cm. long, 2·8 cm. in diameter, globose, white.
_Leaves_ 3, up to 26 cm. long, 2·5 cm. broad at the base, lanceolate
(when opened flat), becoming deeply channelled above, acuminate,
clasping at the base, glabrous. _Peduncle_ up to 25 cm. long,
greenish-brown, glabrous. _Infloresence_ about 14-flowered, more or less
corymbose, 4 mm. long, about 6 cm. in diameter. _Bracts_ 1·4-2·5 cm.
long, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate into a long fine point, membranous,
as long as the pedicels. _Pedicels_ 1·1-2·5 cm. long, terete.
_Perianth-segments_ free to the base, spreading, 1·2 cm. long, 4 mm.
broad, oblong-lanceolate, dark purple with white margins, 5-nerved; the
outer cucullate at the apex with a fringe of short glandular hairs; the
inner rounded and fringed with short glandular hairs. _Filaments_ 8 mm.
long, 1·5 mm. broad in widest part, lanceolate, acuminate, more or less
compressed below, convex on both sides above; anthers 4 mm. long,
oblong, each lobe with a short beak. _Ovary_ 5 mm. long, 2·5 mm. in
diameter, 3-lobed, glabrous; style 6 mm. long, semiterete; the style in
open flowers bent away from stamens and later becoming sharply bent;
stigma semiglobose, covered with glandular hairs.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 75.--Fig. 1, flower; Fig. 2, bract; Fig. 3, stamen; Fig. 4,
     cross-section of ovary; Fig. 5, gynaecium; Fig. 6, outer
     perianth-segments, front and side views; Fig. 7, inner
     perianth-segments, front and side views.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _76._

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 76.

PROTEA RECONDITA.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

PROTEACEAE. Tribe PROTEEAE.

PROTEA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 169.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Protea recondita=, _Buek. ex Meisn. in DC. Prodr._ xiv. 237; _Fl. Cap._
vol. v. sect. i. p. 584.

       *       *       *       *       *


This rare _Protea_ was sent to us by Miss L. Guthrie of the Bolus
Herbarium, who received it from Mr. de Wet of Ceres. Mr. de Wet
described it as a low trailing plant with the branches 2 feet long and
raised about a foot above the ground. The heads are hidden by the upper
leaves. Hitherto the species has only been recorded from Ezelsbank on
the Cedarberg Range, Clanwilliam Division, where it was collected by
Drège almost a hundred years ago.

This example, unlike so many species of _Protea_, is not particularly
handsome. The bracts are a pale dull green, and the flowers somewhat
scented, reminding one very much of the odour of _Protea mellifera_.

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No.
1490).

DESCRIPTION:--_Branches_ pale green, glabrous. _Leaves_ 7-19 cm. long,
1·8-7 cm. broad (the largest leaves surrounding the head), elliptic or
elliptic-lanceolate, obtuse, narrowed to the base, with distinct reddish
veins and a reddish margin, glabrous. _Head_ sessile, 5·5 cm. long, 7
cm. in diameter. _Involucral-bracts_ in about 9 rows; the outer ovate,
subacuminate, obtuse, ciliate; the inner oblong, incurved, somewhat
concave, slightly exceeding the flowers, scantily pilose. _Receptacle_
3·2 cm. broad at base, about 1·5 cm. high, conical. _Perianth-sheath_
2·6 cm. long, dilated, keeled and 3-nerved below, glabrous, except for
setae near the apex; lip 6 mm. long, setulose with golden-brown hairs.
_Hypogynous scales_ 1·5 mm. long, ovate. _Ovary_ covered with long
golden-brown hairs; style 4 cm. long, strongly falcate; stigma 3 mm.
long, almost imperceptibly passing into the style.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 76.--Fig. 1, branch with flower head; Fig. 2, receptacle;
     Fig. 3, inner bract; Fig. 4, outer bract; Fig. 5, single flower;
     Fig. 6, one perianthlobe.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _77._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 77.

CROSSANDRA GREENSTOCKII.

_Transvaal, Natal._

       *       *       *       *       *

ACANTHACEAE. Tribe JUSTICIEAE.

CROSSANDRA, _Salisb._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen Plant._ vol. ii. p. 1094.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Crossandra Greenstockii=, _S. Moore in Journ. Bot._, 1880, p. 37; _Fl.
Cap._ vol. v. sect. i. p. 37.

       *       *       *       *       *


This plant is of interest as being one of the many outliers of the
Tropical African flora in Southern Africa, and also as showing a
connection between the floras of Eastern India and Tropical Africa. The
genus _Crossandra_ is represented by about 15 species, most of which
occur in Tropical Africa, and one is recorded from India and the Malay
States. The species figured here occurs in the Nyasa Highlands, and
extends into Natal and the Transvaal as far south as Pretoria. During
the month of October the plant may be found in flower in the
neighbourhood of the Premier Mine, Pretoria, and the bright scarlet
flowers form a conspicuous feature in the veld. Specimens have been
recorded from various localities in the Northern Transvaal.

The fruits, as is so frequent in many species of _Acanthaceae_, have an
explosive mechanism, _i.e._ they burst suddenly into two valves when
wetted and scatter the seeds. The seeds, of which there are four in each
fruit, are tightly enveloped with long hairs which straighten out and
become mucilaginous when wet, thus fixing the seed to the ground.

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No.
1494).

DESCRIPTION:--An acaulescent plant with underground rootstocks. _Stem_
short, glabrous. _Leaves_ opposite, 5-11 cm. long, 2·2-5·2 cm. broad,
obovate or elliptic, the narrower leaves sometimes lanceolate, obtuse,
narrowed at the base, with the midrib and lateral veins prominent
beneath, distinct above, glabrous or very sparsely pilose, especially
on the midrib and veins. _Peduncle_ 11-16 cm. long, terete, pilose,
naked below, but with 2 opposite leaves above. _Inflorescence_ 5-8 cm.
long, 1·7-2·2 cm. in diameter, more or less 4-angled. _Bracts_ 2·5 cm.
long, 1·8 cm. broad, obovate, shortly aristate, with 4-7 long teeth on
the margins, ciliate-glandular on both sides; bracteoles two, 2·5 cm.
long, 2 mm. broad, linear, acuminate, acute, glandular. _Sepals_ 5; the
lateral sepals 5 mm. long, 1·5 mm. broad, linear, shortly aristate;
remainder 9 mm. long, 2·5 mm. broad, oblong, subacuminate, ciliate
above. _Corolla-tube_ 2·2 cm. long, cylindric, ventricose at the base,
inflated and glandular above; lobe 1·2 cm. long, 2·2 cm. broad, somewhat
semicircular in outline. _Anthers_ hairy. _Ovary_ 1 cm. long, 3 mm.
broad, oblong in outline, shortly beaked, glabrous; style threadlike;
stigma inflated and hollow at the apex. _Ovules_ 2 in each cell,
discoid, covered with scales.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 77.--Fig. 1, corolla; Fig. 2, a single flower, showing bract
     and bracteoles; Fig. 3, corolla laid open; Fig. 4, calyx
     surrounding the ovary; Fig. 5, gynaecium; Fig. 6, apex of style;
     Fig. 7, ovary with two ovules.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _78._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 78.

ROODIA DIGITIFOLIA.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

FICOIDEAE. Tribe MESEMBRYEAE.

       *       *       *       *       *

     =Roodia=, _N. E. Brown_ (genus novum). _Herba_ succulenta, nana,
     caespitosa. _Proles_ bifoliatae. _Pedunculus_ bracteatus,
     uniflorus. _Calyx_ in tubum distinctum supra ovarium productus
     6-lobus. _Petala_ numerosa, libera. _Stamina_ numerosissima,
     pluriseriata, omnia a basi in tubum abrupte inflexa, exterioribus
     brevioribus. _Ovarium_ multiloculare. _Stigma_ parvum,
     inconspicuum, sessile, integrum. _Fructus_ multilocularis; loculi
     alis binis subchartaceis tecti et dorsum versus tuberculo clausi.

     =Roodia digitifolia=, _N. E. Brown_. _Planta_ 8-11 cm. alta,
     caespitosa, glabra. _Proles_ bifoliatae, confertae. _Folia_ erecta,
     8-11 cm. longa, 10-15 mm. crassa, digitiformia, subteretia faciebus
     interioribus planis, apice obtusissima, inferne viridia, superne
     purpureo-tincta. _Pedunculus_ 3-6 cm. longus, apice 4-5 mm.
     crassus, erectus, uniflorus, infra medium bibracteatus, purpureus.
     _Calycis tubus_ cum ovario 10 mm. longus, 10-11 mm. diametro; lobi
     inaequales, 5-8 mm. longi, 5-7 mm. lati, ovati, obtusi vel
     subacuti. _Corolla_ circiter 4 cm. diametro; petala numerosa,
     subquadriseriata, exteriora circiter 15 mm. longa et 1 mm. lata,
     interiora breviora, linearia, apice obtusa vel dentata, pulchre
     purpurea. _Stamina_ numerosissima, in tubum calycis abrupte et
     arcte inflexa. _Ovarium_ supra concavum. _Stigma_ sessile, parvum,
     inconspicuum. _Fructus_ 12-14-locularis.

     Cape Province: Van Rhynsdorp Division, near Van Rhynsdorp (_Mrs. E.
     Rood_). Growing at the Division of Botany, Pretoria (Garden No.
     403).

       *       *       *       *       *


This interesting plant is so like some species of _Mesembryanthemum_ in
general appearance, that most would unhesitatingly place it in that
genus. For a long time past, however, as I have elsewhere stated, it has
been dawning upon me that _Mesembryanthemum_, as at present understood,
is rather of the nature of a natural order than of a single genus. In
vegetative characters it presents a very great amount of variation, and
in most cases any particular kind of variation is found to be common to
several species, so as to form of them a group, indicating a generic
difference from the others. About a hundred years ago Haworth recognised
this and gave generic names to some of the groups he had formed, which
have neither been accepted nor taken notice of by subsequent authors.

Undoubtedly there is a great similarity in the flowers of many groups of
this genus that differ widely in their vegetative characteristics; yet
when investigated differences in floral structure may often be found
also, which, taken in conjunction with vegetative characters, are quite
as great and as distinctive as those which separate genera in many other
families of plants. This is the case with the plant at present under
consideration, for I find that it has a combination of three floral
characters, which, so far as known to me do not all occur together in
any species of _Mesembryanthemum_, namely: (1) the calyx is produced
into a distinct green tube above the ovary; (2) the stamens are all
abruptly bent down into the calyx-tube; and (3) the stigma is sessile,
undivided, and inconspicuous. Upon this combination of characters in
conjunction with its vegetative character, I establish a new genus, and
have much pleasure in naming it after its discoverer, Mrs. E. Rood, of
Van Rhynsdorp, who sent living plants of it to Dr. I. B. Pole Evans at
Pretoria, where it flowered. The accompanying figure of it was sent to
me by Dr. Pole Evans, together with a living plant and a flower in
fluid, with some notes by Dr. E. P. Phillips, from which the description
has been prepared.

DESCRIPTION:--A dwarf succulent plant branching at or below ground level
and forming clumps about 8-11 cm. high. _Leaves_ 2 to each growth, or 4
when the new growth is made, 8-11 cm. long, 10-15 mm. thick, erect,
nearly cylindric or finger-like, but with the inner face flattened,
united at the base, obtuse at the apex, glabrous and smooth, green
below, purplish at the apical part. _Peduncle_ erect, 3-6 cm. long, and
4-5 mm. thick at the apex, with a pair of bracts about 2 cm. long below
the middle. _Calyx_ 6-lobed, tube (including the ovary) 10 mm. long,
produced about 7 mm. above the ovary, about 10-11 mm. in diameter,
slightly constricted under the lobes, glabrous, green; lobes unequal,
5-8 mm. long, 5-7 mm. broad, ovate, subacute or obtuse, four of them
with membranous margins. _Corolla_ about 4 cm. in diameter, petals
numerous, in about 4 series, loosely recurved, spreading over one
another, the outer about 15 mm. long and 1 mm. broad, the others
gradually shorter, all linear, obtuse or notched at the apex, bright
magenta. _Stamens_ very numerous, all abruptly bent into and closely
pressed against the calyx-tube in a dense mass, leaving a clear central
opening to the stigma, the outermost series being the shortest.
_Stigma_ sessile, sunk in a slight pit and level with the concave top of
the ovary, entire, inconspicuous.

It may not be out of place to point out that dried specimens of
_Mesembryanthemum chrysoleucum_, Schlechter are so similar to _Roodia
digitifolia_ in general appearance, that the plant might easily be
mistaken for a species of _Roodia_. It differs, however, by being
destitute of bracts on its peduncle; by the leaves, peduncle, and calyx
being papillate; by the calyx being lobed down to the top of the ovary,
the stamens erect; and by having 7 stigmas and a 7-celled capsule.--N.
E. BROWN.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 78.--Fig. 1, plant 2/3 nat. size; Fig. 2, longitudinal
     section through the flower; Fig. 3, calyx with 2 sepals; Fig. 4,
     longitudinal section through receptacle; Fig. 5, petals; Fig. 6,
     stamen; Fig. 7, bract; Fig. 8, fruit closed; Fig. 9, fruit open;
     Fig. 10, cross-section of leaf.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _79._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 79.

BAUHINIA GALPINII.

_Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

LEGUMINOSAE. Tribe BAUHINIEAE.

BAUHINIA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 575.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Bauhinia Galpinii=, _N. E. Br. in Gard. Chron._, 1891, p. 728; _Hook. Ic.
Pl. t._ 19.

       *       *       *       *       *


This handsome _Bauhinia_, known in the Transvaal as “The Pride of de
Kaap,” is a common plant in the low veld east of the Drakensberg. It is
a low half-climbing bush, and when in flower is a striking object in the
veld, the bright red flowers standing out in sharp contrast to the
surrounding vegetation. Specimens were first sent to Kew in 1880 by Mr.
T. Nelson, and later Mr. E. E. Galpin sent material which he collected
at Barberton. The plant lends itself to cultivation, and may be kept as
a trimmed bush in lawns, etc. If left to grow unchecked it becomes very
lanky. Our plate was prepared from a specimen growing in the garden of
the Division of Botany, Pretoria, and the plant has grown to a height of
about 30 ft. up a tree of _Cupressus sempervirens_, var. _pyramidalis_.
In cultivation, at least in Pretoria, very few seeds are produced.
Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No.
1601).

DESCRIPTION:--A half-climbing shrub, growing to a height of 5-30 ft.
_Branches_ with light-brown bark, minutely pubescent. _Leaves_ petioled;
lamina 1-3 cm. long, 3-5·5 cm. broad, more or less reniform in outline,
lobed above, subcordate at the base, with the veining distinct above and
prominent beneath, glabrous; petioles 8-1·5 cm. long, convex beneath,
channelled above. _Stipules_ 3 mm. long, deciduous. _Flowers_ in
3-7-flowered racemes opposite the leaves. _Bracts_ and bracteoles 3 mm.
long, setaceous, deciduous. _Buds_ light brown, acuminate, pubescent.
_Calyx-tube_, 2-2·7 cm. long; limb spathaceous, unilateral in open
flowers. _Petals_ long clawed; claws 2 cm. long, somewhat compressed;
limb 1·7-2 cm. long, 1·5-1·7 cm. broad, ovate, apiculate, subcordate,
at the base. _Fertile stamens_ 4; filaments 2·5 cm. long, terete, bent
inwards above; anthers 7 mm. long, linear. _Staminodes_ 5 mm. long,
setaceous, sometimes deeply 2-lobed. _Ovary_ on a long gynophore 1·5 cm.
long, silky pubescent; style 5 mm. long, stigma capitate. _Fruit_ 12·5
cm. long, 2·5 cm. broad, with a double margin along one edge,
oblanceolate, tipped with the persistent style, and narrowed at the
base. _Seeds_ 1·9 cm. long, oblong, flattened, dark brown.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 79.--Fig. 1, surface view of flower to show staminodes, the
     limb of the petals removed; Fig. 2, pistil, showing long gynophore;
     Fig. 3, stamen; Figs. 4, 5, front and side views of calyx; Fig. 6,
     fruit.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.

[Illustration: _80._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 80.

KLATTIA STOKOEI.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

IRIDACEAE. Tribe SISYRINCHIEAE.

KLATTIA, _B. Kr._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant_. vol. iii. p. 702.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Klattia Stokoei=, _L. Guthrie in Annals Bolus Herb_. vol. iii. p. 76.

       *       *       *       *       *


The discovery of this remarkable plant by Mr. T. P. Stokoe on the
Hottentot’s Holland Mountains, near Somerset West, adds another species
to one of the South African endemic genera, which hitherto has been
regarded as monotypic. _Klattia partita_, found by Bowie, Thunberg, and
Burchell, is a rare plant, and is only known from the Langebergen near
Swellendam. It is figured by Marloth in “The Flora of South Africa,” t.
41. Our present species differs from _K. partita_ in the more spreading
leaves, the very much shorter perianth-tube, the narrower segments which
have a red limb, and the larger capsule. The genus _Klattia_ is closely
related to _Witsenia_, which we figured on plate 34, but is
distinguished from this genus by having a very short perianth-tube and
long segments, much longer than the tube. _Klattia_ was named in honour
of Dr. F. W. Klatt, a teacher at Hamburg, who published several memoirs
on the _Iridaceae_.

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No.
1436).

DESCRIPTION:--_Inflorescence_ about 8-flowered. _Spathe-valves_ 2; the
larger 11·5 cm. long, 1 cm. broad, green and lanceolate above, red and
strongly keeled below, subacute, glabrous; the smaller red 5 mm. long, 2
mm. broad, rounded above, keeled on the back with the keel produced into
a beak 7 mm. long. _Floral_ bracts white 3 cm. long, keeled, acute.
_Perianth-segments_ divided almost to the base 5·7 cm. long, filiform
below, broadened above into a linear portion 1 mm. broad. _Filaments_
4·5 mm. long, filiform; anthers 1 mm. long, linear, sagittate at the
base. _Ovary_ 2 mm. long, 2 mm. in diameter, obovate in outline. Style
6 cm. long, filiform; stigma simple. _Capsule_ 1·3 cm. long. _Seeds_ 8
mm. long, 2 mm. broad, linear, concave in front, silky and 2-grooved at
the back.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 80.--Fig. 1, portion of stem; Fig. 2, inflorescence; Figs. 3,
     4, spathe valves; Fig. 5, a single flower laid open; Fig. 6,
     pistil; Fig. 7, anther; Fig. 8, ovary; Fig. 9, top of style,
     showing the three stigmas.

     F.P.S.A., 1922.




INDEX TO VOLUME II.


PLATE

ALOE EXCELSA, 62

ALOE STRIATA, 55

ALOE WICKENSII, 41

ANDROCYMBIUM MELANTHIOIDES, 53


BAUHINIA GALPINII, 79


CEROPEGIA TRISTIS, 44

COMMELINA BENGHALENSIS, 42

CORYCIUM CRISPUM, 61

CROSSANDRA GREENSTOCKII, 77


DAUBENYA AUREA, var. COCCINEA, 71

DIMORPHOTHECA SPECTABILIS, 57


ERYTHRINA CAFFRA, 59


FERRARIA ANTHEROSA, 66


GAZANIA PAVONIA, 69

GAZANIA PYGMAEA, 64

GAZANIA SUBULATA, 51

GLADIOLUS ALATUS, var. NAMAQUENSIS, 63

GLADIOLUS PRITZELII, 68


HARVEYA SQUAMOSA, 67

HELIOPHILA SCANDENS, 48

HESSEA ZEYHERI, 43

HOLMSKIOLDIA SPECIOSA, 49


KLATTIA STOKOEI, 80

KNIPHOFIA ALOOIDES, 47


LEUCOSPERMUM TOTTUM, var. GLABRUM, 74


MASSONIA LATIFOLIA, 46

MESEMBRYANTHEMUM ALOIDES, 54

MESEMBRYANTHEMUM CRASSIPES, 73

MIMETES CAPITULATA, 58


OCHNA PRETORIENSIS, 70

ORNITHOGALUM ROODIAE, 75

ORNITHOGALUM THUNBERGIANUM, 65


PELARGONIUM CRASSICAULE, 52

POLYXENA HAEMANTHOIDES, 56

PROTEA RECONDITA, 76


RHAMPHICARPA TUBULOSA, 50

ROODIA DIGITIFOLIA, 78


SPARAXIS GRANDIFLORA, 60

STAPELIA PILLANSII, var. ATTENUATA, 72


WATSONIA GALPINII, 45

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FLOWERING PLANTS OF SOUTH
AFRICA; VOL. 2/3 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
